                                                   Print whole section



Motor vehicle and car expenses
Deductions for work-related use of your car or another
motor vehicle



  Expenses for a car you own or lease
  Deductions for work-related car expenses you incur for the use
  of your own car.




  Expenses for a vehicle that isn't yours or
  isn't a car
  Deductions for work-related use of a vehicle that either does not
  belong to you or is not a car.




  Expenses for parking tolls accidents
  licence and fines
  Deductions for parking fees, tolls, accident damage, renewing
  your licence or paying a fine.




QC 72123



Expenses for a car you own or lease
Deductions for work-related car expenses you incur for the
use of your own car.
Last updated 4 May 2026



What are car expenses?
Car expenses are the costs you incur to own and operate a car,
including its decline in value.

This includes:

   fuel and oil expenses

   repairs, servicing, maintenance and cleaning expenses

   registration

   insurance

   interest on a car loan

   lease payments

   decline in value of the car.

The following expenses aren't car expenses:

   the purchase price of the car

   principal repayments of a car loan

   modifications, alterations of improvements to the car

   parking and tolls.

Modifications, alterations and improvements can be added to the cost
(as a second element cost) of the car for the purpose of calculating it's
decline in value.


Claiming a deduction for car expenses
To claim a deduction for car expenses:

   Your vehicle must meet the definition of a car.

   You must own or lease the car.

      You do not own or lease the car if you use it under a salary
      sacrifice or novated lease arrangement.

   The expenses must be for work-related trips.
     You can claim for trips between workplaces or to perform your
     work duties.

     You can't claim for trips between your home and place of work,
     except in limited circumstances.

  You must have spent the money yourself and weren't reimbursed.

  You must have the required records.

If it's someone else's car or it's another type of vehicle (such as a truck
or motorcycle), see Expenses for a vehicle that isn't yours or isn't a
car.

If your travel is partly private, you can only claim a deduction for the
work-related portion of your expenses.

You claim the tax deduction in your income tax return as a work-
related car expense.

If you receive an allowance from your employer for car expenses, you
must include it as assessable income in your tax return. The allowance
amount is shown on your income statement or payment summary.

For a summary of this information in PDF format, see Car expenses
(PDF, 322KB) .


Definition of a car
To claim a work-related car expense, the vehicle must be a car.

A car is a motor vehicle that carries a load of less than one tonne and
fewer than 9 passengers (including the driver). This includes electric
(zero emissions) vehicles (EVs), plug-in hybrid vehicles (PHEVs) and
hybrid vehicles if they meet this definition.

Motorcycles and similar vehicles are not cars.

If your vehicle is a car and you use it for work-related purposes, you
must calculate your deduction using one of the 2 methods below.

If your vehicle doesn't meet this definition, see Expenses for a vehicle
that isn't yours or isn't a car.


You must own or lease the car
To claim car expenses you must own, lease (from a finance company)
or hire the car (under a hire-purchase arrangement with the
dealership).

If you use a car owned by a family member, and you can show there is
a private arrangement that made you the owner or lessee of the car
(even if you aren't the registered owner or lessee), you work out your
car expenses as though it is your car.

A car you use under a salary sacrifice or novated lease arrangement is
usually leased by your employer from a financing company, and your
employer typically pays for the running costs and claims deductions.
You can't claim running costs for such a car because you don't own or
lease it but you can claim additional expenses, like parking and tolls
associated with your work use of the car.

If you don't own or lease the car (or don't have a private arrangement
that makes you the owner or lessee), see Expenses for a vehicle that
isn't yours or isn't a car.




  Example: private arrangement
  When Rory turned 18, she bought a car from her parents for
  $1,000. She now pays the insurance, fuel, registration and other
  running costs, and no one else uses the car. However, the
  registration hasn't been updated and the car is still registered in
  her mother's name.

  Rory is eligible to claim her work-related car expenses even
  though the registration hasn't been changed to her name. She
  would be treated as the owner because she can show that:

     she bought the car from her parents

     she is now responsible for all ownership and running costs of
     the car.




Calculating your car expense deductions
To work out your deduction for car expenses, you can use either the:

  Cents per kilometre method

  Logbook method
You can also use the calculator to work out your deduction for either
method.


   Work-related car expenses calculator


If you're claiming car expenses for more than one car, you can use a
different method for each car. You can also change the method you
use in different income years for the same car.




   Cents per kilometre method
   How to calculate a deduction for car expenses using the cents
   per kilometre method and the records you need to keep.




   Logbook method
   How to calculate a deduction for car expenses using the logbook
   method and the records you need to keep.




QC 72124



Cents per kilometre method
How to calculate a deduction for car expenses using the
cents per kilometre method and the records you need to
keep.

Last updated 12 August 2026



How it works
The cents per kilometre method allows you to claim a set rate for each
work-related kilometre you travel, as long as you meet the conditions.

Using this method, you:

   can claim a maximum of 5,000 km for work-related use per year
  don't need receipts for your expenses (e.g. fuel receipts)

  do need a record to show how you calculate your work-related
  kilometres (e.g. using a diary or the myDeductions tool in the ATO
  app)

  need to be able to show that you own the car.

The rate per km covers all of your car expenses including decline in
value, registration and insurance, maintenance, repairs and fuel costs.

You can’t add these, or any other car expenses, on top of the rate
when calculating your deduction.


Calculating your deduction
To calculate your deduction using this method, multiply the number of
work-related kilometres you travel in the car by the rate per kilometre
for that income year.

You can claim a maximum of 5,000 work-related kilometres per car.

'Work-related kilometres' are the kilometres your car travels in the
course of earning your assessable income. For more information on
what travel is incurred in the course of earning your assessable
employment income, see Trips you can and can't claim.

You can work out the number of work-related kilometres the car
travelled during the income year by making a reasonable estimate. For
example, if you make a 20 kilometre work-related round trips in your
car once a week and you worked for 48 weeks in the year, your work-
related kilometres will be 960 (20 kilometres × 48 weeks).

Use the rate for the income year for which you are claiming a
deduction:

  2026-27: use 91 cents per kilometre

  2024–25 and 2025–26: use 88 cents per kilometre

  2023–24: use 85 cents per kilometre

  2022–23: use 78 cents per kilometre

  2020–21 and 2021–22: use 72 cents per kilometre

  for rates in earlier years, see Prior year tax return forms and
  schedules.
You need to keep records that show how you work out your work-
related kilometres.

If you and another joint owner use the car for separate income-
producing purposes, you can each claim up to 5,000 work-related
kilometres.


Keeping records for cents per kilometre
method
If you use the cents per kilometre method, you don't need receipts.

You do need to be able to show that you own the car and how you
work out your work-related kilometres. For example, you could record
your work-related trips:

  in a diary

  using the myDeductions tool in the ATO app.




  Example: car deduction using cents per
  kilometre
  Once per week, Johan makes a 27-kilometre round trip in his own
  car from his head office in the city to meet with clients. In
  addition, once per month he makes a 106-kilometre round trip to
  visit clients at another location.

  When Johan consults his diary at the end of the 2025–26 income
  year, he works out he was at work for 47 weeks, but he missed
  one weekly meeting with clients as he was sick. He also
  determines that, although he was on leave for 5 weeks during
  the income year, he still made 12 × 106-kilometre round trips to
  visit clients.

  He works out his work-related kilometres as:

  Number of weekly trips multiplied by distance of weekly
  trip equals total weekly trip kilometres

  46 × 27 km = 1,242 km
   Number of monthly trips multiplied by distance of monthly
   trip equals total monthly trip kilometres

   12 × 106 km = 1,272 km

   Total weekly trip kilometres plus total monthly trip
   kilometres equals total trip kilometres

   1,242 km + 1,272 km = 2,514 km

   Johan works out his deduction for the 2025–26 income year as:

   2,514 km × 0.88 = $2,212




QC 107246



Logbook method
How to calculate a deduction for car expenses using the
logbook method and the records you need to keep.

Last updated 12 June 2026



How it works
The logbook method allows you to claim the work-related portion of
your actual car expenses.

Expenses you can claim include running costs such as fuel, electricity,
servicing, registration, insurance and the decline in value, as long as
you use the car in the course of earning your assessable employment
income.

To calculate your deduction using the logbook method, you need to:

   keep a logbook that shows your work-related trips for a continuous
   period of at least 12 weeks and your odometer records
  keep receipts or other records of your car expenses

  use your logbook to calculate the deductible portion of your car
  expenses.


Keeping a logbook
Your logbook must:

  cover at least 12 continuous weeks and be broadly representative of
  your travel

  include the reason and purpose, as well as the destination of every
  work-related journey, the odometer reading at the start and end of
  each journey, and the total kilometres travelled on the journey

  include odometer readings for the start and end of the logbook
  period and the total kilometres travelled during that period.

Each journey in your logbook must be made at the end of the journey
or as soon as possible afterwards.

Your logbook is valid for 5 years. However, if your circumstances
change (for example, if you change jobs or move to a new house), and
the logbook is no longer representative of your work-related use, you
will need to complete a new 12 week logbook.

In each of the 4 years following the first year, you need to keep:

  odometer readings for the start and end of the full period you
  owned the car during the income year

  your work-related kilometres and use percentage for the income
  year based on the logbook.

If you are using the logbook method for 2 or more cars, keep a logbook
for each car and make sure they cover the same period.

You can keep an electronic logbook using the myDeductions tool in the
ATO app, or keep a paper logbook.

You must retain your logbook and odometer records for 5 years after
the end of the latest income year that you rely on them to support your
claim.

If you don't have a valid logbook, you can't use the logbook method to
claim car expenses. You may be able to use the cents per kilometre
method instead.


Keeping records of car expenses
In addition to keeping a valid logbook, you must keep the following
records:

   receipts for your fuel and oil expenses, or a record of your
   reasonable estimate of these expenses based on the odometer
   readings for the start and end of the period you owned the car, the
   fuel consumption for your car and the average price of fuel during
   the income year

   receipts for other expenses for your car – for example, registration,
   insurance, lease payments, services, tyres, repairs, electricity
   expenses and interest charges

   a record of the purchase price of the car and how you work out your
   claim for the decline in value of your car, including the effective life
   and method you use.


Electric cars – records of electricity expenses
If your car is electric, instead of keeping receipts for fuel and oil, you
must keep:

   receipts for electricity from commercial charging stations

   evidence that shows you incur electricity costs to charge your car
   at home, such as an electricity bill and how you calculated the
   direct cost of charging your car.

Hybrid cars – records of fuel and electricity
expenses
If your car is a hybrid, you must keep all the following:

   receipts for your fuel and oil

   receipts for commercial charging stations

   evidence that shows you incur electricity costs to charge your car
   at home, such as an electricity bill and how you calculated the
   direct cost of charging your car.
Calculating your deduction
To calculate your deduction using the logbook method, follow these
steps:

Step 1 – Work out the total number of kilometres you travelled during
the logbook period.

Step 2 – Work out the number of kilometres you travelled for allowable
work-related trips during the logbook period.

Step 3 – Divide the work-related kilometres (step 2) by the total
kilometres (step 1), then multiply by 100. This is your work-related use
percentage.

Step 4 – Add up your total expenses for the period that you are
claiming.

Step 5 – Multiply your work-related use percentage (step 3) by your
car expenses (step 4). This is the amount you claim as a deduction.

'Work-related kilometres' are the kilometres your car travels in the
course of earning your assessable employment income. For more
information on what travel is incurred in the course of earning your
assessable employment income, see Trips you can and can't claim.


Calculating electricity costs for your electric vehicle
If your car is an electric (zero emissions) vehicle (EV), you can
calculate your electricity costs either by:

  calculating the actual amount you spent on charging your car at
  commercial charging stations or at home

  by multiplying the EV home charging rate for the relevant income
  year by the total number of kilometres travelled during the income
  year based on odometer records.

The EV home charging rate for the 2022–23 to 2025–26 income years
is 4.2 cents per kilometre.

For more information, see paragraph 16 of Practical Compliance
Guideline PCG 2024/2 Electric vehicle home charging rate –
calculating electricity costs when a vehicle is charged at an
employee's or individual's home.
Calculating fuel and electricity costs for your plug-in
hybrid vehicle
If your car is a plug-in hybrid electric vehicle (PHEV), for the 2024–25
income year onwards, you can work out your fuel and electricity
expenses either by:

  calculating the actual amount you spent on fuel and charging your
  car at commercial charging stations or at home

  using methodology set out at paragraphs 17 to 27 of PCG 2024/2,
  which allows you to use the EV home charging rate.

For the 2023–24 income year and earlier income years, you can only
claim the actual amount you incurred on fuel and charging your EV at
commercial charging stations or at home.

If you use the home charging rate in PCG 2024/2 to calculate your
electricity costs for the income year, unless your EV or PHEV has the
functionality to report the percentage of the car's total charge based
on the charging location, you can't add the cost of any commercial
charging stations to this amount. These amounts must be disregarded.



  Example: home charging percentage can be
  accurately determined
  Bill owns an electric car which he uses for work purposes. Bill
  charges his electric car at home and at commercial charging
  stations.

  For the 2025–26 income year, Bill has:

     a valid logbook

     the odometer reading for his car at the start and the end of
     the income year

     an electricity bill for his home showing he incurred electricity
     expenses

     receipts for his commercial charging station expenses which
     total $172.

  Bill's car generates a report detailing the annual percentage of
  total charge that relates to home charging. The report shows that
  Bill charges his electric vehicle 75% at home during the 2025–26
  income year.

  Bill travelled a total of 10,000 km in the 2025–26 income year. His
  home charging kilometres are determined by applying the home
  charging percentage to the total kilometres travelled.

  Bill calculates his home charging kilometres as:

  Total kilometres multiplied by home charging percentage equals
  home charging kilometres

       10,000 km × 75% = 7,500 km

  To calculate his total home charging expenses, Bill multiplies the
  home charging kilometres by the EV home charging rate:

       7,500 km × 4.2c/km = $315

  Bill calculates his total charging expenses as:

  Home charging expenses plus commercial charging expenses
  equals total charging expenses

       $315 + $172 = $487

  To calculate his deduction for charging his car during the 2025–
  26 income year, Bill will multiply his total charging expenses
  ($487) by his work-related use percentage from his logbook.



Working out the decline in value of a car
Cars are depreciating assets so a deduction for their decline in value
can be claimed as a car expense if you are using the logbook method.

However, there is a limit on the cost of the car that you can claim as
decline in value deductions over the car's effective life. This is referred
to as the car limit car limit.

If the cost of the car you purchase exceeds the car limit in the year you
buy it, its cost for decline in value purposes will be the car limit. The
limit is applied to the cost of the car, not your ownership interest in the
car. This means if you purchase a car exceeding the car limit with
another person jointly, you will use half of the cost limit for the purpose
of calculating your decline in value deduction.

The Commissioner's determination of the effective life of a car is
generally 8 years.
Example: working out the decline in value of a car
(diminishing value method)
On 3 July 2025, Lana buys a 5-seater car for $75,000 which she
uses for work purposes during the 2025–26 income year.

As Lana bought the car in the 2025–26 income year, when
working out the car's decline in value for that income year, the
cost of the car is reduced to $69,674 (the car limit for 2025–26).

Lana uses the Commissioner's determination of the effective life
and works out her decline in value using the diminishing value
method in the following way:

Car cost (car limit): $69,674

Effective life of the car: 8 years

Diminishing value formula: Cost × (days
held ÷ 365) × (200% ÷ asset’s effective life)

    $69,674 × (362 ÷ 365) × (200% ÷ 8) = $17,275.33

Based on her logbook Lana works out her work-related use
percentage as 69%. This means she can claim
$17,275.33 × 69% = $11,919.98 as a deduction for the decline in
value of the car in her 2025–26 tax return.

Lana can also claim 69% of her fuel, insurance, tyres, repairs and
other expenses for the car.




Example: working out the decline in value of a car
(prime cost method)
Vlad buys an electric car on 1 July 2025 and uses to carry out his
duties as an employee.

Based on his valid logbook, Vlad works out he uses his car 11% of
the time for work purposes, that his work-related use percentage
is 11%. The car cost $30,000.

Vlad works out his decline in value deduction using the prime
cost method as follows:
   Asset cost × (days held ÷ 365) × (100% ÷ asset’s effective life)

       $30,000 × (365 ÷ 365) × (100% ÷ 8) = $3,750

   As Vlad's work-use percentage based on his logbook is 11%, he
   can claim a deduction of $413 ($3,750 × 11%) for the decline in
   value of his car in the 2025–26 income year.


You can't claim a deduction for the decline in value of your car if you
use the cents per kilometre method.




QC 107247



Expenses for a vehicle that isn't
yours or isn't a car
Deductions for work-related use of a vehicle that either
does not belong to you or is not a car.

Last updated 8 June 2026




Claiming a deduction for vehicle expenses
You can claim a deduction for work-related expenses for a vehicle that
either:

   does not belong to you (is someone else's car)

   is not a car (such as a truck or motorcycle, whether it belongs to
   you or someone else).

A tax deduction for these expenses is claimed as a work-related
travel expense, rather than a work-related car expense.

To claim a deduction:

   The expenses must be for work-related trips.

      You can claim for trips between workplaces or to perform your
      work duties.
     You can't claim for trips between your home and place of work,
     except in limited circumstances.

  You must have spent the money yourself and weren't reimbursed.

  You must have a record of your expenses.

If your travel is partly private, you can only claim a deduction for the
work-related portion of the expenses you incur.

If the vehicle is a car and belongs to you, you calculate and claim your
deduction in a different way. See Expenses for a car you own or lease.

If you receive an allowance from your employer for vehicle expenses,
you must include it as assessable income in your tax return. The
allowance amount is shown on your income statement or payment
summary.


Someone else's vehicle
This means a vehicle owned by your employer or anyone other than
you.

You can't claim running costs for a car you use under a salary sacrifice
or novated lease arrangement. In this situation the car is usually leased
by your employer from a financing company, and your employer
typically pays for the running costs and claims deductions. You can
claim additional expenses, like parking and tolls associated with your
work use of the car.

If you use a car owned by a family member, and you can show there is
a private arrangement that made you the owner or lessee of the car
(even if you aren't the registered owner), you work out your car
expenses as though it is your car.


A vehicle that isn't a car
Vehicles that are not cars include motorcycles, scooters and similar
vehicles, and vehicles with:

  one tonne or greater carrying capacity such as trucks, heavy
  vehicles and some utes

  a carrying capacity of 9 or more passengers (including the driver),
  such as a minibus.
Calculate deduction for vehicle expenses
To claim a deduction for a vehicle that isn't yours or isn't a car, you:

   work out your actual expenses for your work-related travel in the
   vehicle

   claim the deduction in your tax return as a work-related travel
   expense (not as a work-related car expense).

You can't use the cents per kilometre method or the logbook method
to work out your claim. However, as you can only claim a deduction for
the expenses related to your work-related travel, you may wish to keep
a document similar to a logbook to calculate your work-related use
percentage. While it is not a requirement, it is the easiest way to show
how you calculated the expenses related to your work-related travel.


Keeping records of vehicle expenses
You must keep:

   evidence of how you calculated your work-related use of the vehicle

   original receipts for all of your vehicle expenses

   details of how you work out your claim for the decline in value of the
   vehicle, including the effective life and method you use.

If your vehicle is electric or a plug-in hybrid electric vehicle (PHEV),
and you're relying on the home charging rate outlined in Practical
Compliance Guideline PCG 2024/2 Electric vehicle home charging rate
– calculating electricity costs when a vehicle is charged at an
employee’s or individual’s home, you'll also need to keep an electricity
bill for your residential premises showing you incurred electricity costs.

PCG 2024/2 is only available for PHEVs from 1 July 2024 onwards.

You can use the myDeductions tool in the ATO app to keep your
vehicle expense records.




   Example: actual work-related expenses for a
   motorcycle
   Ben buys a motorcycle that he uses for his work, making local
   deliveries. He also uses his motorcycle when he's not working. To
   help work out his work-related use he decides to keep a record,
   similar to a logbook, that shows his work-related and private
   trips.

   Ben's logbook shows he travelled a total of 3,000 kilometres on
   his motorcycle for the whole income year. During the 12 week
   period he kept his record of trips, he travelled 800 kilometres in
   total, with 600 kilometres being work-related.

   Ben calculates his work use percentage as 75% (600 ÷ 800).

   Ben keeps receipts for all his expenses. His total expenses for
   the motorcycle for the income year were:


     Fuel and oil                                              $560

     Repair                                                    $400

     Registration                                              $540

     Compulsory Third Party insurance                          $300

     Decline in value                                        $1,800

     Total                                                  $3,600


   To work out his tax deduction, Ben multiplies his total expense by
   his work use percentage:

   $3,600 × 75% = $2,700




QC 72125



Expenses for parking, tolls,
accidents, licence and fines
Deductions for parking fees, tolls, accident damage,
renewing your licence or paying a fine.

Last updated 8 June 2026
Parking fees and tolls
You can claim a deduction for parking fees and tolls you incur when
you use your car or other vehicle for work-related purposes.

You can't claim a deduction for parking at or near a regular place of
work. You also can't claim a deduction for tolls you incur for trips
between your home and work. These are private expenses.




  Example: parking on work-related trip
  Karlyn is a trainee lawyer. She has to rush some legal documents
  to the court before it closes for the day. Karlyn drives from the
  office to the court. She parks directly in front of the court and
  pays a fee for parking, which her employer does not reimburse.

  Karlyn can claim the cost of the car parking as a deduction
  because her trip from the office to the court is work-related.




  Example: tolls and parking on trip from home to
  work
  Carissa works in the city centre. There is no parking for
  employees in her building, so Carissa pays for car parking
  nearby.

  When Carissa is running late for work she takes a quicker route
  and incurs a toll.

  Carissa can't claim a deduction for the cost of:

     parking near her regular place of work

     the occasional tolls when driving between her home and her
     regular place of work.




Damage to a third-party motor vehicle
If you use your own motor vehicle in the course of your employment
and you're involved in an accident that causes damage to another
vehicle, you may be able to claim a deduction for:

  the costs you incur to repair your vehicle

  damages or compensation for the damage to the other vehicle if
  you are liable.

Generally, you 'incur' an expense when you either pay it or are liable to
pay. For more information, see TR 97/7 Income tax: section 8-1 –
meaning of 'incurred' – timing of deductions.


Drivers licence
You can't claim a deduction for the cost to get or renew your drivers
licence, even if you must have it as a condition of employment. This is
a private expense.

You can claim a deduction for additional costs you incur to get a
special licence or condition on your licence to perform your work
duties. For example, you can claim the cost you incur to get a heavy
vehicle permit.



  Example: special licence
  Rhonda works on a sugar cane farm. She must operate heavy
  machinery to carry out her employment duties. To operate some
  of the machinery she needs a driver's licence and a heavy
  vehicle permit. Her driver's licence renewal costs her $45 per
  year and it costs $73 to apply for the heavy vehicle permit.

  The $45 to renew her licence is not deductible because it is a
  private expense. The cost of the heavy vehicle permit ($73) is
  deductible as it is an additional expense she incurs that directly
  relates to her employment duties and is not a private expense.




Fines and penalties
You can't claim a deduction for any fines you get when you travel to
work or during work. This includes parking and speeding fines or
penalties.
     Example: parking fine at work
     Warren's employment duties often require him to drive from the
     office where he works to various building sites.

     On a couple of occasions when Warren has been running late, he
     has parked in a loading zone and received a parking fine.

     Warren can't claim a deduction for the parking fines. It doesn't
     matter that he is working at the time he is issued with the fine.




  QC 72126



Our commitment to you
We are committed to providing you with accurate, consistent and clear
information to help you understand your rights and entitlements and meet
your obligations.

If you follow our information and it turns out to be incorrect, or it is
misleading and you make a mistake as a result, we will take that into
account when determining what action, if any, we should take.

Some of the information on this website applies to a specific financial year.
This is clearly marked. Make sure you have the information for the right year
before making decisions based on that information.

If you feel that our information does not fully cover your circumstances, or
you are unsure how it applies to you, contact us or seek professional
advice.

Copyright notice
© Australian Taxation Office for the Commonwealth of Australia

You are free to copy, adapt, modify, transmit and distribute this material as
you wish (but not in any way that suggests the ATO or the Commonwealth
endorses you or any of your services or products).
