Guide to capital gains tax 2026
A guide to capital gains tax (CGT) for individuals and entities with complex
CGT obligations.

This publication was current at 1 June 2026




NAT 4151-06.2026
Our commitment to you

We are committed to providing you with reliable, accessible, and useful information to help you
understand your rights and entitlements and your obligations.

If you follow our information in this publication and it is either misleading or turns out to be incorrect
and you make a mistake as a result, we must still apply the law correctly. If that means you owe us
money, you must pay it but we will not charge you a penalty. Also, if you acted reasonably and in
good faith we will not charge you interest. If correcting the mistake means we owe you money, we
will pay it and any interest to which you are entitled.

For more information, go to ato.gov.au/howyouareprotected

If you feel that this publication does not fully cover your circumstances, or you are unsure how it
applies to you, you can seek further help from us.

The ATO Charter outlines the commitments we make to you and everyone we work with, our
expectations of you and steps you can take if you are not satisfied. For more information, go to
ato.gov.au/atocharter

Currency of information

We regularly revise our publications to take account of any changes to the law, so make sure that you
have the latest information. If you are unsure, you can check for more recent information on our
website at ato.gov.au or contact us.

This publication was current at 1 June 2026.

© Australian Taxation Office for the Commonwealth of Australia, 2026

You are free to copy, adapt, modify, transmit and distribute this material as you wish (but not in any
way that suggests the ATO or the Commonwealth endorses you or any of your services or products).

Published by

Australian Taxation Office
Canberra
June 2026

NAT 4151-06.2026




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                                 2
Contents
About the guide to CGT ............................................................................................................... 4
    How CGT works and your obligations .................................................................................................. 4
    CGT positions not dealt with in this guide ........................................................................................... 4
    CGT schedule for individuals ................................................................................................................ 4
    CGT worksheets.................................................................................................................................... 5
    Terms we use in the guide to CGT ....................................................................................................... 5

What's new with CGT for individuals? ........................................................................................ 6

About capital gains tax ................................................................................................................ 6
    Does capital gains tax apply to you? .................................................................................................... 6
    How to work out your capital gain or capital loss ............................................................................... 41
    Keeping CGT records ........................................................................................................................... 51
    Trust distributions and your CGT position ......................................................................................... 57
    Investments in shares and units ......................................................................................................... 73
    Shares in an early stage innovation company.................................................................................. 103
    Forestry managed investment scheme interests..............................................................................109
    CGT and the TOFA rules .................................................................................................................... 114
    Real estate and main residence......................................................................................................... 116
    Loss, destruction or compulsory acquisition of an asset ................................................................ 164
    Marriage or relationship breakdown .................................................................................................. 177
    Deceased estates .............................................................................................................................. 191
    Earnout and deferred consideration arrangements ..........................................................................198

Appendixes .............................................................................................................................. 203
    Appendix 1 Summary of CGT events ................................................................................................ 204
    Appendix 2 Consumer price index (CPI) ...........................................................................................213
    Appendix 3 Flowcharts ......................................................................................................................214
    Appendix 4 Definitions ...................................................................................................................... 225




Australian Taxation Office             Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                                                                3
About the guide to CGT
How CGT works, your obligations and when to use the CGT schedule and
worksheets.


How CGT works and your obligations
The Guide to capital gains tax 2026 explains how CGT works and will help you to meet your
CGT obligations.

If you're an individual who's made a capital gain or loss from selling shares and units, or
received a distribution of a capital gain from a managed fund, you may prefer to use Capital
gains tax personal investors guide 2026.

If you have a small business, see Small business CGT concessions.


CGT positions not dealt with in this guide
This guide doesn't deal fully with the CGT position of the following:
•   An individual or entity that isn't an Australian resident for tax purposes.
•   Companies, trusts and funds – see, CGT schedule and instructions 2026.
•   A company that's the head company of a consolidated group – see, Consolidation.

This guide doesn't cover individuals or entities whose gains or losses aren't subject to CGT
but are covered under other tax law. For example, gains or losses from:
•   carrying on a business of share trading
•   net profit or loss from profit-making activity of renovating properties.


CGT schedule for individuals
Whether you need to lodge a CGT schedule will depend on how you lodge your tax return
and the amount and type of your capital gains and capital losses.

Online tax return lodgments
If you lodge online using myTax as an individual or partner in a partnership, you'll need to
complete a Capital gains tax schedule 2026, if:
•   a CGT event happens in 2025–26 and your total current year capital gains or losses are
    more than $10,000
•   you receive a distribution from a trust (including a managed fund) that includes
    receiving a net capital gain of more than $10,000
•   you select the capital gains tax exemption, roll-over or additional discount type code W:
    Affordable housing discount
•   you entered into an earn-out arrangement, which requires an amendment to a prior
    year's assessment – see CGT schedule and instructions 2026, item 7 – step 4.



Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                   4
Paper tax return lodgments
Partnerships and individuals who lodge a paper tax return aren't required to lodge a CGT
schedule.

For information on the CGT schedule for individuals and partners in a partnership, see
question 18 Capital gains.

If you're an individual who enters into an earn-out arrangement and you need to make an
amendment to a prior year's assessment, see item 7 – step 4 of Instructions to complete the
CGT schedule and tax return 2026.


CGT worksheets
The 2 CGT worksheets will help you keep track of your records and work out any capital
gains or capital losses you need to include in your tax return.

There is:
•   a Capital gain or capital loss worksheet 2026 – work out your capital gain or capital loss
    for each CGT event
•   a CGT summary worksheet for tax returns 2026 – summarise your capital gains, capital
    losses and produce the final net amount you need to include in your tax return.

You can print out these forms and complete them as you work through the guide.


Terms we use in the guide to CGT
While we have sometimes used the word ‘bought’ rather than ‘acquired’, you may have
acquired an asset subject to CGT (a CGT asset) without paying for it. For example, as a gift
or through an inheritance.

Similarly, we refer to ‘selling’ when you may have disposed of it in some other way. For
example, by giving it away or transferring it to someone else. Whether by sale or by any
other means, these disposals are CGT events.

For more information on the terms we use, see Definitions.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                   5
What's new with CGT for individuals?
Find out what's new in legislation or other changes that need to be taken into
consideration for 2026.




About capital gains tax
Explains capital gains tax obligations including if it applies, how to work it out
and what records you need to keep.




Does capital gains tax apply to you?
General background information about CGT and how it applies to you.

What is capital gains tax and what rate of tax do you pay?
CGT is the tax that you pay on any capital gain you include in your annual income tax return.
It isn't a separate tax, merely a component of your income tax. You're taxed on your net
capital gain at your marginal tax rate.

To work out your net capital gain:
•   calculate your total capital gains for 2025–26
•   subtract your total capital losses for 2025–26 and any unapplied capital losses from
    earlier income years
•   subtract your entitlement to any CGT discount and small business CGT concessions.

If your total capital losses for 2025–26 are more than your total capital gains, the difference
is your net capital loss for the year. You can carry it forward to later income years to be
deducted from future capital gains. You can't deduct capital losses or a net capital loss from
your other assessable income. There is no time limit on how long you can carry forward a
net capital loss. You apply your net capital losses in the order that you make them.

There're special rules for capital losses made on collectables. You can't make a capital loss
on a personal use asset.

If you're completing a tax return for an individual and want more information on how to apply
your capital losses, see CGT worksheets in question 18 Capital gains 2026, steps 5 and 6.
For more information for companies, trusts and funds or for completing the CGT summary
worksheet, see Capital gains tax schedule and instructions 2026, step 2.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                    6
Capital gain or capital loss
You make a capital gain or capital loss if a CGT event happens. You can also make a capital
gain if a managed fund or other trust distributes a capital gain to you.

For most CGT events your capital gain is the difference between your capital proceeds and
the cost base of your CGT asset. For example, if you sell an asset for more than you paid for
it, the difference is your capital gain. You make a capital loss if the reduced cost base of
your CGT asset is greater than the capital proceeds.

Generally, you can disregard any capital gain or capital loss you make on an asset if you
acquired it before 20 September 1985 (pre-CGT).

For more information, see Exemptions and roll-overs.

There're special rules that apply when working out gains and losses from depreciating
assets. A depreciating asset is a tangible asset (other than land or trading stock) that has a
limited effective life. It can be expected to decline in value over the time it is used. Certain
intangible assets are also depreciating assets.

If you use a depreciating asset for a taxable purpose (such as in a business), any gain you
make on it is treated as ordinary income and any loss as a deduction. It's only when a
depreciating asset is used for a non-taxable purpose (used privately) that you can make a
capital gain or capital loss on it.

For more information, see CGT and depreciating assets.

To work out whether you have to pay tax on your capital gains, you need to know:
•   whether a CGT event has happened
•   the time of the CGT event
•   what assets are subject to CGT
•   how to calculate the capital gain or capital loss
    –    how to determine your capital proceeds, cost base and reduced cost base
    –    how to apply capital losses and the methods available to calculate a capital gain
•   whether there's any exemption or roll-over that allows you to reduce or disregard the
    capital gain or capital loss
•   whether the CGT discount applies
•   whether you're entitled to any of the small business CGT concessions.

What is a CGT event?
CGT events are the different types of transactions or events that may result in a capital gain
or capital loss. Many CGT events involve a CGT asset; some relate directly to capital
receipts (capital proceeds).

You need to know which type of CGT event applies in your situation. It affects how you
calculate your capital gain or capital loss and when you include it in your net capital gain or
net capital loss.



Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                       7
The range of CGT events is wide. Some happen often and affect many people while others
are rare and affect only a few people. There is a summary of the various types of CGT
events at Appendix 1.

The most common CGT event happens if you dispose of a CGT asset to someone else, such
as if you sell it or give it away, including to a relative.

A CGT event also happens when:
•   an asset you own is lost or destroyed (the destruction may be voluntary or involuntary)
•   shares you own are cancelled, surrendered or redeemed
•   you enter into an agreement not to work in a particular industry for a set period of time
•   a trustee makes a non-assessable payment to you from a managed fund or other unit
    trusts (including a corporate collective investment vehicle (CCIV) sub-fund trust)
•   you have an annual cost base reduction that exceeds the cost base of your interest in
    an attribution managed investment trust or attribution CCIV sub-fund trust
•   a company makes a payment (not a dividend) to you as a shareholder
•   a liquidator or administrator declares that shares or financial instruments you own are
    worthless
•   you receive an amount from a local council for disruption to your business assets by
    roadworks
•   you stop being an Australian resident
•   you enter into a conservation covenant
•   you dispose of a depreciating asset that you used for private purposes.

Subdividing land doesn't result in a CGT event if you retain ownership of the subdivided
blocks. Therefore, you don't make a capital gain or a capital loss at the time of the
subdivision.

Australian residents make a capital gain or capital loss if a CGT event happens to any of
their assets anywhere in the world. As a general rule, foreign residents make a capital gain
or capital loss only if a CGT event happens to a CGT asset that is taxable Australian
property.

Order in which CGT events apply
If more than one CGT event happens, use the one that is most specific to your situation.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                    8
Time of the CGT event
The timing of a CGT event is important because it determines in which income year you
report your capital gain or capital loss.

If you dispose of a CGT asset to someone else, the CGT event happens when you enter into
the contract for disposal. If there is no contract, the CGT event generally happens when you
stop being the asset’s owner.

    Example 1: contract
    In June 2026, Sue enters into a contract to sell land. The contract settles in October
    2026.

    Sue makes the capital gain in 2025–26 (the income year in which she enters into the
    contract), not 2026–27 (the income year in which settlement takes place).


If a CGT asset you own is lost or destroyed, the CGT event happens when you first receive
compensation for the loss or destruction. If you don't receive any compensation, the CGT
event happens when the loss is discovered, or the destruction occurred.

    Example 2: insurance policy
    Laurie owned a rental property that was destroyed by fire in June 2025. He received a
    payment under an insurance policy in October 2025. The CGT event happened in
    October 2025.


CGT events relating to shares and units, and the times of the events, are dealt with in
Investments in shares and units.

What is a CGT asset?
Many CGT assets are easily recognisable, for example, land, shares in a company and units
in a unit trust. Other CGT assets aren't so well understood such as contractual rights,
options, foreign currency, crypto assets and goodwill. All assets are subject to the CGT rules
unless they are specifically excluded.

One example of a crypto asset is bitcoin. For more information on the tax treatment of
crypto assets, see Crypto asset investments.

CGT assets fall into one of 3 categories:
•    collectables
•    personal use assets
•    other assets.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                 9
Collectables
Collectables include the following items that you use or keep mainly for the personal use or
enjoyment of yourself or your associates:
•   paintings, sculptures, drawings, engravings or photographs, reproductions of these
    items or property of a similar description or use
•   jewellery
•   antiques
•   coins or medallions
•   rare folios, manuscripts or books
•   postage stamps or first day covers.

A collectable is also:
•   an interest in any of the items listed above
•   a debt that arises from any of those items
•   an option or right to acquire any of those items.

You can only use capital losses from collectables to reduce capital gains (including future
capital gains) from collectables. You disregard any capital gain or capital loss you make
from a collectable if any of the following apply:
•   you acquired the collectable for $500 or less
•   you acquired an interest in the collectable for $500 or less before 16 December 1995
•   you acquired an interest in the collectable when it had a market value of $500 or less.

If you dispose of several collectables individually that you would usually dispose of as a set,
you're exempt from paying CGT only if you acquired the set for $500 or less. This doesn't
apply to an individual collectable you acquired before 16 December 1995, which is exempt
from CGT if you acquired it for $500 or less. This is irrespective of whether it would usually
be disposed of as part of a set.

Personal use assets
A personal use asset is:
•   a CGT asset, other than a collectable, that you use or keep mainly for the personal use
    or enjoyment of yourself or your associates
•   an option or a right to acquire a personal use asset
•   a debt resulting from a CGT event involving a CGT asset kept mainly for your personal
    use or enjoyment
•   a debt resulting from you doing something other than gaining or producing your
    assessable income or carrying on a business.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                  10
Personal use assets may include such items as:
•   boats
•   furniture
•   electrical goods
•   household items
•   crypto assets (if they're acquired and used in a short period of time mainly to purchase
    items for personal use or consumption).

Land and buildings aren't personal use assets. Any capital loss you make from a personal
use asset is disregarded.

If a CGT event happens to a personal use asset, disregard any capital gain you make if you
acquire the asset for $10,000 or less. If you disposed of personal use assets individually that
would usually be sold as a set, you get the exemption only if you acquire the set for $10,000
or less.

Other assets
Assets that aren't collectables or personal use assets include:
•   land
•   shares in a company
•   rights and options
•   leases
•   units in a unit trust
•   crypto assets (if they're acquired and held for some time before being used, or only a
    small proportion is used to buy items for personal use or consumption)
•   goodwill
•   licences
•   convertible notes
•   your home (see Exemptions)
•   contractual rights
•   foreign currency
•   any major capital improvement made to certain land or pre-CGT assets.

Partnerships
It's the individual partners who make a capital gain or capital loss from a CGT event, not the
partnership itself. For CGT purposes, each partner owns a proportion of each CGT asset.
Each partner calculates a capital gain or capital loss on their share of each asset and claims
their share of a credit for foreign resident capital gains withholding amounts.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                   11
Tenants in common
Individuals who own an asset as tenants in common may hold unequal interests in the asset.
Each tenant in common makes a capital gain or capital loss from a CGT event in line with
their interest in the asset. For example, a couple could own a rental property as tenants in
common with one having a 20% interest and the other having an 80% interest. The capital
gain or capital loss made when the rental property they dispose of (or another CGT event
happens) is split between the individuals according to their legal interest in the property.

Joint tenants
For CGT purposes, individuals who own an asset as joint tenants are each treated as if they
own an equal interest in the asset as a tenant in common. Each joint tenant makes a capital
gain or capital loss from a CGT event in line with their interest in the asset. For example, a
couple owning a rental property as joint tenants split the capital gain or capital loss equally
between them.

When a joint tenant dies, their interest in the asset is taken to have been acquired in equal
shares by the surviving joint tenants on the date of death.

Separate assets
For CGT purposes, there are exceptions to the rule that what is attached to the land is part
of the land. In some circumstances, a building or structure is considered to be a CGT asset
separate from the land.

Improvements to an asset (including land) acquired before 20 September 1985 may also be
treated as a separate CGT asset.

This includes if you acquire land on or after 20 September 1985 which is adjacent to land
you already own (purchased before 20 September 1985) and you amalgamate both pieces
of land on one title.

   Example 3: adjacent land
   On 1 April 1984 Dani bought a block of land. On 1 June 2026, she bought an adjacent
   block. Dani amalgamated the titles to the 2 blocks into one title.

   The second block is treated as a separate CGT asset distinct from the first block.
   Since the second block was acquired on or after 20 September 1985 it is subject to the
   CGT provisions. Therefore, Dani can make a capital gain or loss from the second block
   when the whole area of land is sold.


Buildings, structures and other capital improvements to land you acquired on or
after 20 September 1985
A building, structure or other capital improvement on land that you acquired on or after
20 September 1985 is a separate CGT asset, not part of the land, if a balancing adjustment
provision applies to it. For example, a timber mill building is subject to a balancing
adjustment if it is sold or destroyed, so it is treated as an asset separate from the land it is
on.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                    12
Buildings and structures on land acquired before 20 September 1985
A building or structure on land that you acquired before 20 September 1985 is a separate
asset if either:
•   you entered into a contract for the construction of the building or structure on or after
    that date
•   there was no contract for its construction, and construction began on or after that date.

Other capital improvements to pre-CGT assets
If you make a capital improvement to a CGT asset you acquired before 20 September 1985,
this improvement is treated as a separate asset. It is subject to CGT if, at the time a CGT
event happens (except one that happens because of a death) to the original asset, the cost
base of the capital improvement is both:
•   more than the improvement threshold for the year in which the event happens (see
    Table 1)
•   more than 5% of the amount of money and property you receive from the event.

If there is more than one capital improvement and they're related, they're treated as one
separate CGT asset if the total of their cost bases is more than the threshold and more than
5% of the amount of money and property you receive from the event.

The improvement threshold is adjusted to take account of inflation. The thresholds for 1985–
86 to 2025–26 are shown in table 1.


Table 1: Improvement thresholds for 2025–26 to 1985–86

 Income year                                                   Threshold
                                                               $

 2025-26                                                       187,962

 2024–25                                                       182,665

 2023–24                                                       174,465

 2022–23                                                       162,899

 2021–22                                                       156,784

 2020–21                                                       155,849

 2019–20                                                       153,093

 2018–19                                                       150,386

 2017–18                                                       147,582

 2016–17                                                       145,401




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                    13
 Income year                                                   Threshold
                                                               $

 2015–16                                                       143,392

 2014–15                                                       140,443

 2013–14                                                       136,884

 2012–13                                                       134,200

 2011–12                                                       130,418

 2010–11                                                       126,619

 2009–10                                                       124,258

 2008–09                                                       119,594

 2007–08                                                       116,337

 2006–07                                                       112,512

 2005–06                                                       109,447

 2004–05                                                       106,882

 2003–04                                                       104,377

 2002–03                                                       101,239

 2001–02                                                       97,721

 2000–01                                                       92,802

 1999–2000                                                     91,072

 1998–99                                                       89,992

 1997–98                                                       89,992

 1996–97                                                       88,227

 1995–96                                                       84,347

 1994–95                                                       82,290

 1993–94                                                       80,756

 1992–93                                                       80,036




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026               14
 Income year                                                   Threshold
                                                               $

 1991–92                                                       78,160

 1990–91                                                       73,459

 1989–90                                                       68,018

 1988–89                                                       63,450

 1987–88                                                       58,859

 1986–87                                                       53,950

 1985–86                                                       50,000


What are capital proceeds?
Whatever you receive as a result of a CGT event are your ‘capital proceeds’. For most CGT
events, your capital proceeds are an amount of money or the value of any property you
either:
•   receive
•   are entitled to receive.

If you receive (or are entitled to receive) foreign currency, you work out the capital proceeds
by converting it to Australian currency at the time of the relevant CGT event.

If you receive property (including shares) subject to a deed of escrow (which imposes a
restriction on dealing in that property), you include the market value of the property at the
time of the relevant CGT event in your capital proceeds.

You reduce your capital proceeds from a CGT event if:
•   you're not likely to receive some or all of the proceeds
•   the non-receipt of some or all of the proceeds isn't due to anything you have done or
    failed to do
•   you took all reasonable steps to get payment.

Provided you're not entitled to a tax deduction for the amount you repaid, your capital
proceeds are also reduced by either:
•   any part of the proceeds that you repay
•   any compensation you pay that can reasonably be regarded as a repayment of the
    proceeds.

If you're registered for GST and you receive payment when you dispose of a CGT asset, any
GST payable isn't part of the capital proceeds.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                    15
Market value substitution rule
In some cases, if you receive nothing in exchange for a CGT asset (because you give it away
as a gift), you're taken to have received the market value of the asset at the time of the CGT
event. You may also be taken to have received the market value if both:
•    your capital proceeds are more or less than the market value of the CGT asset
•    you and the purchaser weren't dealing with each other at arm’s length in connection
     with the event.

This is known as the market value substitution rule for capital proceeds.

You're said to be dealing at arm’s length with someone if each party acts independently and
neither party exercises influence or control over the other in connection with the
transaction. The law looks not only at the relationship between the parties but also at the
quality of the bargaining between them.

    Example 4: gifting an asset
    On 7 May 2009, Martha and Stephen bought a block of land.

    In November 2025, they complete a transfer form to have the block transferred to their
    adult son, Paul, as a gift.

    Because they received nothing for it, Martha and Stephen are taken to have received
    the market value of the land at the time it was transferred to Paul.


The market value substitution rule for capital proceeds is subject to some exceptions. For
example, the substitution rule for capital proceeds doesn't apply to the following examples
of CGT event – C2 (about cancellation, surrender and similar endings):
•    the expiry of a CGT asset that the taxpayer owns
•    the cancellation of a statutory licence held by the taxpayer.

It also doesn't apply where CGT event C2 happens for interests held in companies and unit
trusts that:
•    have at least 300 members or unit holders
•    don't have concentrated ownership.

It also doesn't apply if you're a complying super fund, a complying approved deposit fund or
a pooled super trust if both of the following apply:
•    the capital proceeds from the CGT event exceed the market value of the CGT asset
•    assuming the capital proceeds were your statutory income, the proceeds would be non-
     arm’s length income.

There are special rules for calculating the proceeds from a depreciating asset.

If the taxation of financial arrangements (TOFA) rules apply to you, there are special rules
for calculating proceeds from a CGT asset, where you start or cease to have a financial
arrangement as consideration for providing that CGT asset.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                   16
For more information, see:
•    Transferring property to family or friends
•    CGT and depreciating assets.

What is the cost base?
The cost base of a CGT asset is generally the cost of the asset when you bought it. It also
includes certain other costs associated with acquiring, holding and disposing of the asset.

For most CGT events, you need the cost base of the CGT asset to work out whether you
have made a capital gain. If you may have made a capital loss, you need the reduced cost
base of the CGT asset for your calculation. The columns labelled ‘Capital gain’ and ‘Capital
loss’ in the tables at Appendix 1 indicate whether the cost base and reduced cost base of an
asset are relevant for a CGT event.

If they aren't relevant, the same columns in the tables explain how to work out your capital
gain or loss. For example, if you enter into an agreement not to work in a particular industry
for a set period of time, CGT event D1 specifies that you calculate your capital gain or
capital loss by comparing the capital proceeds with the incidental costs.

Cost base isn't relevant when working out a capital gain from a depreciating asset. There
are special rules for calculating the cost of a depreciating asset.

For more information, see:
•    CGT and depreciating assets
•    Guide to depreciating assets 2026

Elements of the cost base
The cost base of a CGT asset is made up of 5 elements:

1.   money or property given for the asset

2.   incidental costs of acquiring the CGT asset or that relate to the CGT event

3.   costs of owning the asset

4.   capital costs to increase or preserve the value of your asset or to install or move it

5.   capital costs of preserving or defending your ownership of or rights to your asset.

You need to work out the amount for each element, then add them together to work out the
cost base of your CGT asset.

If there is an amount paid in a foreign currency that is part of the cost base you should
convert it to Australian currency at the time of the relevant transaction or event.

If you're registered for GST, reduce each element of the cost base of your asset by any
related GST net input tax credits. If you're not registered for GST, you don't make any
adjustments as the GST is included in the cost base.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                  17
First element: money or property given for the asset

Second element: incidental costs of acquiring a CGT asset or relating to a CGT
event
There are 10 incidental costs you may have incurred in acquiring the asset or for the CGT
event that happens to it, including its disposal. They're:

6.   remuneration for the services of a surveyor, valuer, auctioneer, accountant, broker,
     agent, consultant or legal adviser (you can include the cost of advice concerning the
     operation of the tax law as an incidental cost only if the advice was provided by a
     recognised tax adviser and you incurred the cost after 30 June 1989)

7.   costs of transfer

8.   stamp duty or other similar duty

9.   costs of advertising or marketing (but not entertainment) to find a seller or buyer

10. costs relating to the making of any valuation or apportionment to determine your capital
    gain or capital loss

11. search fees relating to an asset (such as fees to check land titles and similar fees, but
    not travel costs to find an asset suitable for purchase)

12. the cost of a conveyancing kit (or a similar cost)

13. borrowing expenses (such as loan application fees and mortgage discharge fees)

14. expenditure that
     a.   is incurred by the head company of a consolidated group to an entity that isn't a
          member of the group
     b.   reasonably relates to a CGT asset held by the head company
     c.   is incurred because of a transaction that is between members of the group

15. expenditure that is incurred as a direct result of your ownership of a CGT asset ending
    (also known as termination, exit or similar fees).

You don't include costs if you:
•    have claimed a tax deduction for them in any year
•    omitted to claim a deduction but can still claim it because the period for amending the
     relevant income tax assessment hasn't expired.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                    18
Third element: costs of owning the asset
The costs of owning an asset include rates, land taxes, repairs and insurance premiums.
Non-deductible interest on borrowings to finance a loan used to acquire a CGT asset and on
loans used to finance capital expenditure you incur to increase an asset’s value are also
third element costs.

You don't include such costs if you acquired the asset before 21 August 1991. Nor do you
include them if you:
•   have claimed a tax deduction for them in any income year
•   omitted to claim a deduction but can still claim it because the period for amending the
    relevant income tax assessment hasn't expired.

You can't include them at all in the cost base of collectables or personal use assets.

You can't index these costs or use them to work out a capital loss.

For more information, see Indexation of the cost base.

Fourth element: capital costs to increase or preserve the value of your asset or to
install or move it
The fourth element is capital costs you incurred for the purpose or the expected effect of
increasing or preserving the asset’s value. For example, costs incurred in applying
(successfully or unsuccessfully) for zoning changes. It also includes capital costs you
incurred that relate to installing or moving the asset. It doesn't include capital expenditure
incurred for goodwill, which may be deductible as a business-related cost.

For more information, see Guide to depreciating assets 2026.

Fifth element: capital costs to preserve or defend ownership or rights to your asset
Capital expenses you incur to preserve or defend your ownership of, or rights to, the asset
come under this element – for example, you paid a call on shares.

Other adjustments to the cost base
Other adjustments include:
•   Assets acquired after 13 May 1997

     If you acquired a CGT asset after 13 May 1997, the cost base of the asset excludes
    –    any expenditure in the first, fourth or fifth element for which you have claimed a tax
         deduction in any income year, or have omitted to claim but can still claim as a
         deduction because the period for amending the relevant income tax assessment
         hasn't expired
    –    heritage conservation expenditure and Landcare and water facilities expenditure
         incurred after 12 November 1998 that give rise to a tax offset.

          Special rules apply for land and buildings. For more information, see Cost base
         adjustments for capital works deductions.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                     19
•   Reversal of deduction: effect on cost base

     In some cases, a deduction you have claimed on a CGT asset can be partly or wholly
    ‘reversed’. This means that part or all of the deduction may be included in your
    assessable income in the income year the CGT event happens. In this case, you
    increase the cost base of the CGT asset by the amount you have to include in your
    assessable income.
•   Indexation of the cost base

     If a CGT event happened to a CGT asset you acquired at or before 11:45 am AEST on
    21 September 1999, you can use either the indexation method or the discount method
    to calculate your capital gain.

     If you use the indexation method, some of the cost base expenditure you incurred up to
    this time may be indexed to account for inflation up to the September 1999 quarter.
    Only expenditure incurred before this time may be indexed because changes to the law
    mean indexation was frozen at that date.

For more information, see How to work out your capital gain or capital loss.

What is the reduced cost base?
When a CGT event happens to a CGT asset and you haven’t made a capital gain, you need
the asset’s reduced cost base to work out whether you have made a capital loss.
Remember, you can use a capital loss to reduce capital gains only, you can't use it to reduce
other income.

Elements of the reduced cost base
The reduced cost base of a CGT asset has the same 5 elements as the cost base, except for
the third element:

16. money or property given for the asset

17. incidental costs of acquiring the CGT asset or that relate to the CGT event

18. balancing adjustment amount (any amount that is assessable because of a balancing
    adjustment for the asset or that would be assessable if certain balancing adjustment
    relief weren't available)

19. capital costs to increase or preserve the value of your asset or to install or move it

20. capital costs to preserve or defend ownership or rights to your asset.

These elements aren't indexed.

You need to work out the amount for each element, then add the amounts together to find
out your reduced cost base for the relevant CGT asset.

If you're registered for GST, you reduce each element of the reduced cost base of the asset
by the amount of any GST net input tax credits for that element. If you're not registered for
GST you don't make any adjustment and the GST paid is included in the reduced cost base.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                 20
The reduced cost base doesn't include any costs you:
•    have incurred for which you have claimed a tax deduction
•    have omitted to claim, but can still claim, a deduction because the period for amending
     the relevant income tax assessment hasn't expired – for example, capital works
     deductions for capital expenditure.

    Example 5: capital works deduction: effect on reduced cost base
    Danuta acquired a new income-producing asset on 28 September 2007 for $100,000.
    She sold it for $90,000 in November 2025. During the period she owned it, she
    claimed capital works deductions of $7,500. Her capital loss is worked out as follows.

    21. The cost base is $100,000.

    22. Subtract capital works deductions of $7,500:
        $100,000 − $7,500 = $92,500

    23. The reduced cost base is $92,500.

    24. Subtract the capital proceeds of $90,000:
        $92,500 − $90,000 = $2,500

    25. The capital loss is $2,500


Modifications to the cost base and reduced cost base
In some cases, the general rules for calculating the cost base and reduced cost base have
to be modified. For example, you substitute the market value for the first element of the cost
base and reduced cost base if:
•    you didn't incur expenditure to acquire the asset
•    some or all of the expenditure you incurred can't be valued
•    you didn't deal at arm’s length with the previous owner in acquiring the asset.

This is known as the market value substitution rule for cost base and reduced cost base.

There are exceptions to the market value substitution rule. One exception is where shares in
a company, or units in a unit trust, are issued or allotted to you but you didn't pay anything
for them.

You don't include expenditure you subsequently recoup (such as an insurance payout you
receive or an amount paid for by someone else) in the cost base and reduced cost of a CGT
asset, except to the extent the recouped amount is included in your assessable income.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                 21
    Example 6: recouped expenditure
    John bought a building in 2000 for $200,000 and incurred $10,000 in legal costs
    associated with the purchase. As part of a settlement, the vendor agreed to pay
    $4,000 of the legal costs. John didn't claim as a tax deduction any part of the $6,000
    he paid in legal costs.

    He later sells the building. As he received reimbursement of $4,000 of the legal costs,
    in working out his capital gain, he includes only the $6,000 he incurred in the cost
    base.


If you acquire a CGT asset and only part of the expenditure relates to the acquisition of the
CGT asset, you can only include that part of the expenditure that is reasonably attributable
to the acquisition of the asset in its cost base and reduced cost base.

Apportionment is also required if you incur expenditure and only part of that expenditure
relates to another element of the cost base and reduced cost base.

Similarly, if a CGT event happens only to part of your CGT asset, you generally apportion the
asset’s cost base and reduced cost base to work out the capital gain or capital loss from the
CGT event.

General value shifting regime
Value shifting generally occurs when a dealing or transaction between 2 parties isn't at
market value. It results in the value of one asset decreasing and (usually) the value of
another asset increasing.

The general value shifting regime (GVSR) rules apply to value shifts that arise:
•    because interests in a company or trust are issued or bought back at other than market
     value, or because their rights are varied so that the value of some interests increases
     while the value of others decreases (direct value shifts on interests)
•    because 2 entities under the same control or ownership conduct dealings or
     transactions that are neither at market value nor arm’s length, so that the value of
     interests in one entity decreases while (usually) the value of interests in the other entity
     increases (indirect value shifting)
•    from the creation of a right over a non-depreciating asset in favour of an associate for
     less than market value (direct value shifts by creating rights).

The rules on direct value shifts on interests target only equity or loan interests held by an
individual or entity that controls the company or trust, the controller’s associates and, if the
company or trust is closely held, any active participants in the arrangement.

The indirect value shifting rules target only equity or loan interests held by an individual or
entity that controls the 2 entities conducting the dealing or transaction and the controller’s
associates. But if the 2 entities are closely held, the rules also target equity or loan interests
held by 2 or more common owners of those entities, the common owner’s associates and
any active participants in the arrangement.

There are also exclusions and safe harbours that limit the operation of the rules.



Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                    22
If the rules apply, you may need to adjust either:
•   the cost base and reduced cost base of equity and loan interests affected by the value
    shift
•   a realised loss or gain on the disposal of the relevant assets.

In some cases, there may also be an immediate capital gain.

For more information, see General value shifting regime – who it affects.

Other special rules
There are other rules that may affect the cost base and reduced cost base of an asset – for
example, they're calculated differently:
•   if the asset is your main residence and you use it to produce income for the first time
    after 20 August 1996, see Real estate and main residence
•   if you receive the asset as a beneficiary or as the legal personal representative of a
    deceased estate, see Deceased estates
•   for bonus shares or units, rights and options and convertible notes, see Investments in
    shares and units
•   under a demerger
•   where you have been freed from paying a debt, see Debt forgiveness
•   where you start or cease to have a financial arrangement as consideration for acquiring
    a CGT asset, see Guide to the taxation of financial arrangements (TOFA)
•   for eligible shares in an early stage innovation company (ESIC) that have been
    continuously held for 10 years or the subject of certain CGT roll-overs, see How does
    CGT apply to qualifying shares and How does the modified CGT treatment apply to a
    roll-over?

Debt forgiveness
A debt is forgiven if you're freed from the obligation to pay it. Commercial debt forgiveness
rules apply to debts forgiven after 27 June 1996. A debt is a commercial debt if part or all of
the interest payable on the debt is, or would be, an allowable deduction.

Under the commercial debt forgiveness rules, a forgiven amount may reduce (in the
following order) your:
•   prior income year revenue losses
•   net capital losses from earlier years
•   deductions for capital allowances and some similar deductions
•   assets’ cost base and reduced cost base.

These rules don't apply if the debt is forgiven either:
•   as a result of an action under bankruptcy law
•   in a deceased person’s will
•   for reasons of natural love and affection.



Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                  23
The rules also don't apply if:
•       the debt is waived and the waiver constitutes a fringe benefit
•       the amount of debt has been, or will be included in your assessable income in any
        income year
•       the debt is a tax-related liability.

    Example 7: applying a forgiven debt
    On 1 July 2025, Josef had available net capital losses from earlier years of $9,000. On
    3 January 2026, he sold shares he had owned for more than 12 months for $20,000.
    They had a cost base (no indexation) of $7,500. On 1 April 2026, a commercial debt of
    $15,000 that Josef owed to AZC Pty Ltd was forgiven. Josef had no prior income year
    revenue losses and no deductible capital expenditure.

    Josef must use part of the forgiven commercial debt amount to wipe out his net capital
    losses from earlier years and the rest to reduce the cost base of his shares. He works
    out the amount of net capital gain to include in his assessable income as follows.

    Step 1: Adjust net capital losses from earlier years
    •      The available net capital losses from earlier years is $9,000.
    •      Subtract the debt forgiveness adjustment of $9,000:
           $9,000 − $9,000 = $0
    •      The adjusted net capital losses from earlier years is $0 (Zero).

    Step 2: Adjust cost base
    •      The cost base of shares (no indexation) is $7,500.
    •      Subtract the debt forgiveness adjustments of $6,000:
           $7,500 − $6,000 = $1,500
    •      The adjusted cost base (no indexation) is $1,500.

    Step 3: Calculate net capital gain
    •      The sale of shares is $20,000.
    •      Subtract the adjusted cost base (no indexation) of $1,500:
           $20,000 − $1,500 = $18,500
    •      Subtract the adjusted net capital losses from earlier years of $0:
           $18,500 − $0 = $18,500
    •      The capital gain (eligible for discount) is $18,500.
    •      Subtract the discount percentage (50%) of $9,250:
           $18,500 − $9,250 = $9,250
    •      The net capital gain is $9,250.




Australian Taxation Office    Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                 24
Acquiring CGT assets
Generally, you acquire a CGT asset when you become its owner. You may acquire a CGT
asset for the following reasons:
•   Someone else has a CGT event (for example, the transfer of land to you under a
    contract of sale). If you acquired an asset because of a CGT event, you're generally
    taken to have acquired the asset at the time of the CGT event. For example, if you enter
    into a contract to purchase a CGT asset, the time of acquisition is when you enter into
    the contract. However, if you obtain an asset without entering into a contract, the time
    of acquisition is when you start being the asset’s owner.
•   Other events or transactions happen that aren't the result of someone else having a
    CGT event. For example, if a company issues or allots shares to you (which isn't a CGT
    event), you acquire the shares when you enter into a contract to acquire them or, if
    there is no contract, at the time of their issue or allotment.
•   Other special CGT rules apply. For example, if a CGT asset passes to you as a
    beneficiary of someone who has died, you're taken to have acquired the asset on the
    date of the person’s death. Also, if you start using your main residence to produce
    income for the first time after 20 August 1996, you're taken to have acquired it at its
    market value at the time it is first used to produce income.

Time of acquisition
The time at which a CGT asset is acquired is important for 5 reasons:

26. CGT generally doesn't apply to assets acquired before 20 September 1985 (pre-CGT
    assets).

27. Different cost base rules apply to assets acquired at different times – for example, the
    costs of owning an asset (see Third element: costs of owning the asset) aren't included
    in the cost base if you acquired it before 21 August 1991.

28. It determines whether the cost base can be indexed for inflation and the extent of that
    indexation, see How to work out your capital gain or capital loss.

29. It determines whether you're eligible for the CGT discount – for example, one
    requirement is that you need to have owned the CGT asset for at least 12 months, see
    How to work out your capital gain or capital loss.

30. It determines whether you're eligible for modified CGT treatment – for example, a capital
    gain on eligible shares in an ESIC is disregarded if the shares were held continuously for
    at least 12 months but less than 10 years, see Exemptions and roll-overs.

Compensation
There can be CGT consequences when you receive compensation.

You disregard some capital gains made as a result of you receiving compensation, for
example, compensation for personal injury or compensation payable under certain
government programs. For details of other compensation you disregard, see Exemptions.
You may defer a capital gain made as a result of compensation for the loss, destruction or
compulsory acquisition of an asset.



Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                  25
A compensation payment may relate to the disposal of, or permanent damage to, an
underlying asset. The underlying asset is the most relevant asset to which the compensation
amount is most directly related. For example, if you receive compensation for damage to a
rental property, the most relevant asset (the underlying asset) is the rental property.

If the payment:
•   relates to the disposal (in whole or part) of an underlying asset, the compensation is
    treated as additional capital proceeds for the disposal of that asset
•   relates to permanent damage to, or permanent reduction in the value of, an underlying
    asset, the compensation is treated as a recoupment of all or part of the acquisition cost
    of the asset (that is, you reduce the cost base and reduced cost base by the amount of
    the compensation)
•   isn't for an underlying asset, it relates to the disposal of the right to seek compensation.
    The capital gain or capital loss will be the difference between the incidental costs and
    the compensation received.

For more information, see Taxation ruling TR 95/35 Income tax: capital gains: treatment of
compensation receipts.

Foreign residents, temporary residents and changing residency
There are special CGT rules that apply if you're a foreign resident or if you become or stop
being an Australian resident. Unless otherwise specified, ‘Australian resident’ means a
resident of Australia for tax purposes. There are also specific rules for Australian residents
and foreign residents who are also temporary residents. These rules don't affect pre-CGT
assets.

For periods when you're a foreign resident or temporary resident only certain assets are
subject to CGT. When you become an Australian resident or stop being one, the range of
assets on which you pay CGT in Australia changes.

You may no longer receive the full 50% discount on capital gains made on taxable Australian
property if you're an individual, a beneficiary of a trust, or a partner in a partnership and
either:
•   a foreign or temporary resident
•   an Australian resident with a period of foreign residency or temporary residency.

For more information, see CGT discount for foreign residents.

Foreign residents
If you're a foreign resident, you're subject to CGT if a CGT event happens to a CGT asset
that is ‘taxable Australian property’.

There are specific rules where the CGT asset is a share or right acquired under an employee
share scheme and you're or have been a temporary resident.

For more information, see ESS – Foreign income exemption for Australian residents and
temporary residents.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                     26
Taxable Australian property
Taxable Australian property includes:
•   a direct interest in real property situated in Australia or a mining, prospecting or
    quarrying right to minerals, petroleum and quarry materials situated in Australia
•   a CGT asset that you have used at any time in carrying on a business through a
    permanent establishment in Australia
•   an indirect Australian real property interest (which is an interest in an entity, including a
    foreign entity, where you and your associates hold 10% or more of the entity and the
    value of your interest is principally attributable to Australian real property).

Taxable Australian property also includes an option or right over one of the above.

For CGT events happening on or after 20 May 2009, a leasehold interest in land situated in
Australia is 'real property situated in Australia'.

Certain CGT assets will also be taken to be taxable Australian property. See Choosing to
disregard capital gains and capital losses when you cease being an Australian resident.

If you're a foreign resident, or the trustee of a trust that wasn't a resident trust for CGT
purposes, and both of the following apply:
•   you acquired a post-CGT indirect Australian real property interest before 11 May 2005
•   that interest didn't have the necessary connection with Australia but is taxable
    Australian property
•   you're taken to have acquired it on 10 May 2005 for its market value on that day.

If you're a foreign resident and have entered into a transaction on or after 1 July 2016 to
dispose of a CGT asset of yours that is taxable Australian property, payments made to you
in that transaction may be subject to withholding.

For more information, see Foreign residents and capital gains tax.

Temporary residents
Temporary residents are subject to the same CGT rules as foreign residents. However, there
are specific rules where the CGT asset is a share or right acquired under an employee share
scheme and you're, or have been, a temporary resident. For more information, see ESS –
Foreign income exemption for Australian residents and temporary residents.

This means, if you're a temporary resident, you'll be subject to CGT on CGT events that
happen to taxable Australian property.

You're a temporary resident, as well as an Australian or foreign resident, if you meet all of
the following:
•   hold a temporary visa granted under the Migration Act 1958
•   aren't an Australian resident within the meaning of the Social Security Act 1991
•   don't have a spouse who is an Australian resident within the meaning of the Social
    Security Act 1991.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                    27
The Social Security Act 1991 defines an Australian resident as a person who resides in
Australia and is an Australian citizen, the holder of a permanent visa, or a protected special
category visa holder.

Anyone who is an Australian resident for tax purposes after 6 April 2006, but isn't a
temporary resident, can't later become a temporary resident, even if they later hold a
temporary visa.

Ceasing to be a temporary resident
If you cease being a temporary resident and remain an Australian resident, then you're taken
to have acquired assets (other than assets you acquired before 20 September 1985) that
aren't taxable Australian property for their market value at the time you ceased being a
temporary resident. There is an exception to this rule for employee shares and rights.

Becoming an Australian resident
When you become an Australian resident (and are not also a temporary resident), you're
taken to have acquired your assets at the time you became a resident, for their market value
at that time. This doesn't apply to assets you acquired before 20 September 1985 (pre-CGT
assets) and assets that were taxable Australian property.

If you have become an Australian resident, the general cost base rules apply to any CGT
assets that are taxable Australian property.

Ceasing to be an Australian resident
If you cease being an Australian resident, or ceased being a resident trust for CGT purposes,
you're taken to have disposed of each of your assets that aren't taxable Australian property
for their market value at the time you ceased being a resident. In the case of any indirect
Australian real property interests and options or rights to acquire such interests, you're
taken to have immediately reacquired these assets for their market value.

For more information, see Taxable Australian property.

Exception for a temporary resident
If you're a temporary resident when you cease to be an Australian resident, you're not taken
to have disposed of any of your assets.

Choosing to disregard capital gains and capital losses
If you're an individual, you can choose to disregard all capital gains and capital losses you
made when you stopped being a resident.

If you ceased being a resident and make this choice, the assets are taken to be taxable
Australian property until the earlier of either:
•   a CGT event happening to the assets that involves you ceasing to own the assets (for
    example, their sale or disposal)
•   you again becoming an Australian resident.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                    28
The effect of making this choice is that the increase or decrease in value of the assets from
the time you cease being a resident to the time of the next CGT event, or of you again
becoming a resident, is also taken into account in working out your capital gains or capital
losses on those assets.

Choices
There are a number of provisions in the CGT laws that allow you to make a choice.

Some of the provisions allow you to defer or roll over a capital gain you make when a CGT
event happens (such as exchanging an asset for a replacement asset) until a later CGT
event (such as selling the replacement asset).

When and how you make a choice
The general rule under CGT law is that you must make a choice by the day you lodge your
income tax return for the income year in which the relevant CGT event happened.

The way you prepare your tax return is sufficient evidence of your choice. However, there
are some exceptions:
•   companies must make some decisions about replacement asset roll-overs earlier
•   choices relating to amounts disregarded under the small business retirement exemption
    must be made in writing
•   choices relating to the assessment of capital gains of resident testamentary trusts must
    be made by a trustee within a specific period.

Once you make such a choice, it can't be changed. Your choice is binding.

However, there are some circumstances when we consider that you haven't made a choice.
These are if you lodge your tax return without being aware that either:
•   events have happened that required you to make a choice
•   a choice was available.

In these circumstances, we may allow you more time to make a choice.

Factors to be considered for an extension of time
To determine if more time should be allowed, we consider factors such as whether:
•   you have an acceptable explanation for not making the choice by the time it should have
    been made
•   it would be fair and equitable in the circumstances to allow you more time to make a
    choice
•   prejudice to the Commissioner of Taxation (Commissioner) may result from additional
    time being allowed to you (note that the absence of prejudice by itself isn't enough to
    justify the granting of an extension)
•   it would be fair and equitable to people in similar positions and the wider public interest
•   any mischief is involved.

Each case is decided on its own merits.



Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                  29
How to request an extension of time to make a choice
If you have lodged a tax return without knowing a choice was available to you under CGT
law and you want to find out how to make a request for more time to make the choice, see
Applying for an extension on a capital gain roll-over.

Examples of choices available under capital gains tax
CGT choices you can make include:
•   You may use the indexation method rather than the CGT discount method if a CGT
    event happens to a CGT asset you acquired before 21 September 1999 (or are taken to
    have acquired before that date for the purpose of using those methods). See Choosing
    the indexation or discount method.
•   You may make a capital loss for the income year in which a liquidator or administrator
    declares in writing that shares or securities held in a company are worthless. See Shares
    in a company in liquidation or administration.
•   You may roll over a capital gain if a company in which you hold shares is taken over and
    you receive shares in the takeover company and the takeover meets certain conditions.
    This is known as a scrip for scrip roll-over. It can also apply if a trust or fund in which
    you hold units is taken over and you receive units in the takeover trust or fund. The
    company, trust or fund will usually advise investors if the conditions for roll-over are
    met. See Scrip for scrip roll-over.
•   You may roll over a capital gain if you hold shares in a company that demerges (or
    splits), you receive shares in the demerged company, and the demerger meets certain
    conditions. A roll-over can also apply if you hold units in a trust or fund that demerges
    and you receive units in the demerged trust or fund. The head company or head trust or
    fund will usually advise investors if the conditions for a roll-over are met. See
    Demergers.
•   You may roll-over a capital gain if you receive money or property (or both) as
    compensation for the loss or destruction of an asset or for the compulsory acquisition of
    property if certain conditions are met. See Loss, destruction or compulsory acquisition
    of an asset.
•   You may treat a dwelling as your main residence even though
    –    you no longer live in it (see Continuing main residence status after dwelling ceases
         to be your main residence)
    –    you're yet to live in it but will do so as soon as practicable after it is constructed,
         repaired or renovated and will continue to live in it for at least 3 months (see
         Constructing, renovating or repairing a dwelling on land you already own).

You make the choice when you prepare your income tax return for the income year in which
you enter into the contract to sell the dwelling. If you own both the dwelling that you can
choose to treat as your main residence for one of the periods above and the dwelling you
actually lived in during that period, then you make the choice for the income year in which
you enter into the contract to sell the first of those dwellings.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                   30
Exemptions and roll-overs
There are exemptions and roll-overs that may allow you to reduce, defer or disregard your
capital gain or capital loss.

If you have to complete a CGT schedule, you may need to provide information regarding the
capital gains reduced or disregarded. For more information, see:
•   for individuals – question 18 Capital gains.
•   for companies, trusts and funds – Capital gains tax schedule and instructions 2026.

There is no general roll-over or exemption for a capital gain you make when you sell an
asset and:
•   put the proceeds into a super fund
•   use the proceeds to purchase an identical or similar asset
•   transfer an asset into a super fund.

For example, if you sell a rental property and put the proceeds into a super fund, or use the
proceeds to purchase another rental property, a roll-over isn't available.

If you're a small business entity, there are concessions that allow you to reduce, defer or
disregard your capital gain when you sell your business assets. These concessions are in
addition to the CGT exemptions and roll-overs available more widely.

For more information, see Small business CGT concessions.

Exemptions
Generally, capital gains and capital losses from pre-CGT assets (that is, an asset you
acquired before 20 September 1985) are exempt. However, CGT event K6 can result in
capital gains if certain CGT events happen to pre-CGT shares in a company or to pre-CGT
interests in a trust. See Taxation ruling TR 2004/18 Income tax: capital gains: application of
CGT event K6 (about pre-CGT shares and pre-CGT trust interests) in section 104-230 of the
Income Tax Assessment Act 1997.
Another important exemption is for a capital gain or capital loss you make from a CGT event
relating to a dwelling that was your main residence. This rule can change depending on how
you came to own the dwelling and what you have done with it, for example, if you rented it
out. For more information, see Real estate and main residence.

Capital gains and capital losses that are also disregarded include those you make from:
•   a car (that is, a motor vehicle designed to carry a load of less than one tonne and fewer
    than 9 passengers) or motorcycle or similar vehicle
•   a decoration awarded for valour or brave conduct, unless you paid money or gave any
    other property for it
•   collectables acquired for $500 or less
•   a capital gain from a personal use asset acquired for $10,000 or less
•   any capital loss from a personal use asset
•   CGT assets used solely to produce exempt income or some amounts of non-assessable
    non-exempt income (that is, tax-free income)


Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                  31
•   a CGT asset that is your trading stock at the time of a CGT event
•   certain profits, gains or losses resulting from the disposal of shares in a pooled
    development fund, see Appendix 7 of the Company tax return instructions 2026
•   compensation or damages you receive for any
    –    wrong or injury you suffer in your occupation
    –    wrong, injury or illness you or your relatives suffer
•   compensation you receive under the firearms surrender arrangements
•   winnings or losses from gambling, a game or a competition with prizes
•   transferring an asset into a Special Disability Trust for no consideration
•   a reimbursement or payment of your expenses (but not for the loss, destruction or
    transfer of an asset) under a scheme established
    –    by an Australian Government agency, a local government body or foreign
         government agency
    –    under an Act or legislative instrument (for example, regulations or local government
         by-laws)
•   a reimbursement or payment of expenses under the Unlawful Termination Assistance
    Scheme or the Alternative Dispute Resolution Assistance Scheme
•   a reimbursement or payment of your expenses under the General Practice Rural
    Incentives Program or the Rural and Remote General Practice Program
•   a reimbursement or payment made under the M4/M5 Cashback Scheme
•   a right or entitlement to a tax offset, deduction or a similar benefit under an Australian
    law, under the law of a foreign country or part of a foreign country
•   some types of testamentary gifts
•   assignment of a right under, or for, a general insurance policy held with an HIH
    company, to the Commonwealth, the trustee of the HIH trust or a prescribed entity
•   your rights being created or your rights ending for making a super agreement (as
    defined in the Family Law Act 1975), the termination or setting aside of such an
    agreement or such an agreement otherwise coming to an end
•   the ending of rights that directly relate to the breakdown of your marriage or
    relationship, including cash you receive as part of your marriage or relationship
    breakdown settlement
•   a CGT event happening for a segregated current pension asset (made by a complying
    super entity)
•   in certain circumstances, a general insurance policy, a life insurance policy or an annuity
    instrument
•   in certain circumstances, the disposal of eligible venture capital investments made by a
    venture capital limited partnership (VCLP), an early stage venture capital limited
    partnership (ESVCLP) or an Australian venture capital fund of funds (AFOF), see Venture
    capital and early stage venture capital limited partnerships
•   eligible shares in an ESIC you have held continuously for less than 10 years and, in the
    case of capital gains, the shares were also held for at least 12 months, see How does
    CGT apply to qualifying shares


Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                     32
•   a financial arrangement where gains and losses are calculated under the TOFA rules,
    see section 118-27 Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 (ITAA 1997)
•   certain CGT events happening to shares held by an Australian resident company that
    represents a non-portfolio interest in a foreign company to the extent the foreign
    company has an underlying active business (Subdivision 768-G of the ITAA 1997)
•   ceasing to hold an eligible vessel to the extent it is used to produce certain exempt
    income, see subsection 104-235(1AA) of the ITAA 1997.

Other exemptions: capital gains
You may reduce your capital gain if, because of a CGT event, you have included an amount
in your assessable income other than as a capital gain. For example, if you make a profit on
the sale of land that is included in your assessable income as ordinary income, you don’t
also include that profit as a capital gain.

There is a range of concessions that allow you to disregard part or all of a capital gain made
from an active asset you use in your small business.

For more information, see Small business CGT concessions.

Other exemptions: capital losses
You disregard any capital loss you make:
•   from the expiry, forfeiture, surrender or assignment of a lease if the lease isn't used
    solely or mainly for the purpose of producing assessable income
•   from a payment to any entity of personal services income that is included in an
    individual’s assessable income under the alienation of personal services income
    provisions, or any other amount attributable to that income
•   as an exempt entity.

Other exemptions: Norfolk Island residents
There are special rules for when CGT will apply to assets held by Norfolk Island residents.
The references in this guide to 20 September 1985 apply in relation to the asset as if they
were references to 24 October 2015, if both of the following apply:
•   on or before 23 October 2015 you
    –    were a Norfolk Island resident
    –    acquired and held the CGT asset
•   any capital gain or loss from a CGT event in relation to the asset would have been
    disregarded (because you were a Norfolk Island resident) if the CGT event in relation to
    the asset had instead happened immediately before 24 October 2015.

For more information, see CGT for Norfolk Island residents.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                  33
Other exemptions: granny flat arrangements
From 1 July 2021, no CGT event arises to eligible individuals on certain granny flat
arrangements if the arrangement satisfies the requirements of the provisions. The CGT
exemption will apply to the creation, variation or termination of a granny flat arrangement.

There are requirements that need to be satisfied for the CGT event not to happen:
•   The individual is eligible for the granny flat interest if they have reached pension age or
    have a disability that means they require assistance for most day-to-day activities for at
    least 12 months.
•   An individual owns the dwelling where the granny flat interest is held, or is to be held, at
    the time of entering into or varying the arrangement or agrees to acquire such a
    dwelling under the arrangement.
•   Both the individual who is to hold the granny flat interest, and the individual who owns
    or agrees to acquire the dwelling where the granny flat interest is to be held, are parties
    to the arrangement.
•   The arrangement is in writing and indicates an intention for the parties to be legally
    bound by it.
•   The arrangement isn't of a commercial nature.

Granny flat interest
A ‘granny flat interest’ in a dwelling is a right (put in place under a granny flat arrangement)
to occupy that dwelling for life.

A granny flat interest doesn't have to relate to properties often referred to as ‘granny flats’
as it isn't a description of the type of property. An individual can have a granny flat interest
in a wide range of properties, such as a family home, or a family’s rental property or holiday
home.

The property that an individual has the right to occupy for life won't change its CGT status
as a result of the granny flat arrangement. For example, if the property is eligible for the
main residence exemption, the granny flat arrangement won't change this. If the property
isn't eligible for the main residence exemption, a granny flat arrangement won't make it
eligible. This is because the asset arising from the granny flat arrangement is the right to
occupy a property, not the property itself.

Dwelling
Under this measure, the term refers to the dwelling the individual has the right to occupy
because of the granny flat interest.

‘Dwelling’ is a unit of accommodation, such as a residential home, and includes the land
beneath the home.

For more information see Granny flat arrangements and CGT.

Roll-overs
You may defer or disregard (that is, roll-over) a capital gain or capital loss until a later CGT
event happens. The types of roll-overs available are listed below. Only the first 4 types are
covered in detail in this guide. If you would like information on the others, contact us.


Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                   34
Marriage or relationship breakdown
In certain cases where an asset or a share of an asset is transferred from one spouse to
another after their marriage or relationship breaks down, any CGT is automatically deferred
until a later CGT event happens. For example, until the former spouse sells the asset to
someone else. For more examples of how CGT obligations are affected by marriage or
relationship breakdown, see Marriage or relationship breakdown.

Loss, destruction or compulsory acquisition of an asset
You may defer a capital gain in some cases where a CGT asset has been lost, destroyed or
is compulsorily acquired.

For more information, see Loss, destruction or compulsory acquisition of an asset.

Scrip for scrip
You may be able to defer a capital gain if you dispose of your shares in a company or
interest in a trust as a result of a takeover, see Scrip for scrip roll-over.

Demergers
You may be able to defer a capital gain or capital loss if a CGT event happens to your shares
in a company or interest in a trust as a result of a demerger, see Demergers.

Other replacement asset roll-overs
You may be able to defer a capital gain or capital loss when you replace an asset in the
following circumstances:
•   an individual or trustee disposes of assets to, or creates assets in, a wholly owned
    company
•   partners dispose of assets to, or create assets in, a wholly owned company
•   a CGT event happens to small business assets and you acquire replacement assets
•   your statutory licence ends and is replaced with another statutory licence or licences
    which authorises substantially similar activity to the original licence or licences
•   you're a financial service provider who had assets (for example, licences) replaced on
    transition to the financial services reform (FSR) regime
•   your property is converted to strata title
•   you exchange shares in the same company or units in the same unit trust
•   you exchange rights or options to acquire shares in a company or units in a unit trust
•   you exchange shares in one company for shares in an interposed company
•   you exchange units in a unit trust for shares in a company
•   a body is converted to an incorporated company
•   you acquire a Crown lease
•   you acquire a depreciating asset
•   you acquire prospecting and mining entitlements
•   you dispose of a security under a securities lending arrangement


Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                 35
•   a trust restructure ends your ownership of units or interests
•   a membership interest in a medical defence organisation (MDO) is replaced with a
    similar membership interest in another MDO and both MDOs are companies limited by
    guarantee
•   you replace an entitlement to water with one or more different water entitlements.

If you would like information on these roll-overs, contact us or your recognised tax adviser.

Other same asset roll-overs
You may be able to defer a capital gain or capital loss when you transfer or dispose of
assets in the following circumstances:
•   an individual or trustee transfers a CGT asset to a wholly owned company
•   a partner transfers their interest in a CGT asset to a wholly owned company
•   a CGT asset is transferred between related companies
•   a trust disposes of a CGT asset to a company under a trust restructure
•   a CGT event happens because of a change to a trust deed of a complying approved
    deposit fund, a complying super fund or a fund that accepts worker entitlement
    contributions
•   a CGT asset is transferred from one small super fund to another complying super fund
    because of a marriage or relationship breakdown
•   a trustee of a trust creates a trust over a CGT asset or transfers a CGT asset to another
    trust where both the transferring and receiving trusts meet certain requirements.

If you would like information on these roll-overs, contact us or your recognised tax agent.

CGT and foreign exchange gains and losses
A CGT asset can be denominated in a foreign currency and foreign currency itself can be a
CGT asset. Gains or losses that you make during the period that you hold such assets will
generally be taxed as a capital gain or capital loss respectively. However, if dealings with
foreign currency denominated assets give rise to rights to receive or obligations to pay
foreign currency, the rights or obligations may be subject to the foreign exchange (forex)
provisions when a right or obligation ceases. For example, if a contract you enter into to sell
an overseas rental property is denominated in foreign currency, you'll have a right to receive
foreign currency (being the sale price of the rental property). The right ceases on payment
of the foreign currency. Such rights and obligations will usually arise on the acquisition or
disposal of a CGT asset.

A forex gain or loss commonly arises for the acquisition or disposal of a CGT asset
denominated in foreign currency, where there is a currency exchange rate fluctuation
between the date you entered into the contract and the date of settlement of the contract
(when payment occurs). Currency fluctuations between the date of acquisition and date of
disposal of a CGT asset are accounted for when the cost base and capital proceeds are
translated into Australian currency.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                  36
It may be that the gain or loss you make on the ending of rights for foreign currency, a
disposal of foreign currency or a right to receive foreign currency is taxable under both CGT
and the forex measures. Generally, to the extent that both the forex measures and CGT
bring to account a forex gain or loss, the forex measures take precedence. That is the forex
gain or loss is brought to account only under the forex provisions.

In addition, if the TOFA rules apply to you, your foreign exchange gains and losses may be
brought to account under those TOFA rules instead of the forex measures.

For more information, see Guide to the taxation of financial arrangements (TOFA).

Short-term foreign exchange gains and losses rules
Some short-term foreign exchange (forex) gains or losses will be treated as capital gains or
capital losses. This arises under transactions for the acquisition or disposal of certain CGT
assets. In such cases, CGT events K10 or K11 will happen, which will result in the forex gain
or loss being integrated into the tax treatment of the CGT asset. Or they're matched to the
character of the gain or loss that would arise from the disposal of the asset. For the short-
term rules to apply, the due date for payment must be within 12 months of acquiring or
disposing of the asset.

For more information, see Capital assets and the 12-month rule.

Translating (converting) CGT assets to Australian dollars
For information on what exchange rates to use in translating foreign currency amounts into
Australian currency, see Translation (conversion) rules.

Examples of the application of forex rules to CGT assets
For examples of the application of the forex rules to acquisitions and disposals of foreign
currency denominated CGT assets, see Common forex transactions.

CGT and depreciating assets
Under the uniform capital allowance (UCA) system, a capital gain or capital loss may arise
from the disposal of a depreciating asset. It will only arise to the extent that you have used
the asset for a non-taxable purpose (for example, for private purposes).

You calculate a capital gain or capital loss from a depreciating asset used for a non-taxable
purpose using the UCA concepts of cost and termination value. You don't use the concepts
of capital proceeds and cost base found in the CGT provisions.

If a balancing adjustment event occurs for a depreciating asset that you have at some time
used for a non-taxable purpose, a CGT event happens. See CGT event K7 in Appendix 1.
The most common balancing adjustment event for a depreciating asset occurs when you
stop holding it (for example, you sell, lose or destroy it) or stop using it.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                  37
Calculating a capital gain or loss for a depreciating asset
You make a capital gain if the termination value of your depreciating asset is greater than its
cost. You make a capital loss if the reverse is the case, that is, the asset’s cost is more than
its termination value.

You use different formulas to calculate a capital gain or capital loss depending on whether
the asset is in a low-value pool or not.

Depreciating asset not in a low-value pool: capital gain
If your depreciating asset isn't a pooled asset, you calculate the capital gain as follows:

   (termination value − cost) × (total of reductions note 1 ÷ total decline note 2)

Depreciating asset not in a low-value pool: capital loss
You calculate the capital loss from a depreciating asset that isn't a pooled asset as follows:

   (cost − termination value) × (total of reductions (note 1 ÷ total decline note 2)

   Example 8: capital gain on depreciating asset
   Larry purchased a truck in August 2024 for $25,000 and sold it in June 2026 for
   $27,000. He used the truck 10% of the time for private purposes. The decline in value
   of the truck under the UCA system up to the date of sale was $2,000. Therefore, the
   total of his reductions relating to his private use is $200 (10% of $2,000). Larry
   calculates his capital gain from CGT event K7 as follows:

        ($27,000 − $25,000) × (200 ÷ 2,000)

   Capital gain from CGT event K7 = $200 (before applying any discount).


Depreciating asset in a low-value pool: capital gain
You calculate the capital gain from a depreciating asset in a low-value pool as follows:

   (termination value − cost) × (1 − taxable use fraction (note 3))

Depreciating asset in a low-value pool: capital loss
You calculate the capital loss from a depreciating asset in a low-value pool as follows:

   (cost − termination value) × (1 − taxable use fraction (note 3))

Notes

31. The total of the reductions in your deductions for the asset’s decline in value that is
    attributable to either
    –     your use of the asset
    –     having it installed ready for use, for a non-taxable purpose.

32. The decline in the value of the depreciating asset since you started to hold it.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                  38
33. Taxable use fraction is the percentage of the asset’s use that is for producing your
    assessable income, expressed as a fraction. This is the percentage you reasonably
    estimate at the time you allocated the asset to the low-value pool.

Application of CGT concessions
A capital gain from a depreciating asset may qualify for the CGT discount if the relevant
conditions are satisfied. If the CGT discount applies, there is no reduction of the capital gain
under the indexation method.

The small business CGT concessions don't apply to a capital gain made from the disposal of
a depreciating asset. This is because a capital gain can only arise out of such an asset’s use
for non-taxable purposes (for example, to the extent it is used for private purposes).

For more information, see How to work out your capital gain or capital loss.

Do any CGT exemptions apply to a depreciating asset?
Exemptions may apply to a capital gain or capital loss made from the disposal of a
depreciating asset:
•   pre-CGT assets – you disregard a capital gain or capital loss from a depreciating asset if
    the asset was acquired before 20 September 1985
•   personal use asset
    –    if a depreciating asset is a personal use asset (that is, one used or kept mainly for
         personal use and enjoyment), you disregard any capital loss from CGT event K7
    –    you also disregard a capital gain under CGT event K7 from a personal use asset
         costing $10,000 or less
•   collectables – you disregard a capital gain or a capital loss from a depreciating asset
    that is a collectable costing $500 or less
•   balancing adjustment event and CGT event – you only include a balancing adjustment
    event that gives rise to a capital gain or capital loss under CGT event K7. However,
    capital proceeds received under other CGT events (for example, CGT event D1, see
    Appendix 1) may still be relevant for a depreciating asset as CGT events aren't the
    equivalent of balancing adjustment events.

Treatment of intellectual property
Under the capital allowance rules, intellectual property is a depreciating asset.

If you grant or assign an interest in an item of intellectual property, you're treated as if you
had stopped holding part of the item. You're also treated as if, just before you stop holding
that part, you had split the original item of intellectual property into 2 parts. That is, the part
you stopped holding and the rest of the original item. You determine a first element of the
cost for each part.

This treatment applies if a licence is granted over an item of intellectual property. To this
extent, the treatment of intellectual property is different from other depreciating assets. The
granting of a licence in respect of other depreciating assets would result in CGT event D1
(about creating contractual rights) happening.

For more information, see Guide to depreciating assets 2026.


Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                     39
Where to now?
How to work out your capital gain or capital loss explains how to calculate a capital gain
using one of the 3 methods:
•   indexation
•   discount
•   'other'.

Trust distributions and your CGT position explains how to calculate your capital gain if a
managed fund or trust has distributed a capital gain to you. You must take into account
capital gains included in trust distributions in working out your net capital gain or net capital
loss.

For more specific directions on how to complete your tax return, see:
•   for individuals – question 18 Capital gains 2026
•   for companies, trusts and funds – Capital gains tax schedule and instructions
    2026 (individuals who use the worksheets may find steps 1, 2 and 3 useful, ignore the
    word ‘entity’).




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                   40
How to work out your capital gain or capital loss
How to work out each capital gain or capital loss you made during 2025–26.

Overview
The following information doesn't explain how to work out your net capital gain or net capital
losses carried forward to later income years. If you're completing the Tax return for
individuals (supplementary section) 2026 and want more information on how to calculate
your net capital gain for 2025–26 or net capital losses carried forward to later income years
(including how to deduct any unapplied net capital losses from earlier years), see
question 18 Capital gains. For more information on companies, trusts and funds or on
completing the CGT summary worksheet, see Capital gains tax schedule and instructions
2026.

Methods of calculating capital gains
There are 3 methods that are used to calculate a capital gain:
•      The 'other' method
•      The indexation method
•      The discount method.

There is only one way to calculate a capital loss.

The 3 methods of calculating capital gains are summarised and compared in Table 2 below.
They're explained in more detail in the following pages. In some cases, you may be able to
choose either the discount method or the indexation method to calculate your capital gain.
In these cases, you can use the method that gives you the better result.

The CGT summary worksheet for tax returns 2026 shows the 3 methods of calculating a
capital gain. You're not obliged to use this worksheet, but you may find it helps you calculate
your capital gain or capital loss for each CGT event.


Table 2: Capital gain calculation methods

    Method type      Indexation method               Discount method          'other' method

    Description of   Allows you to increase the      Allows you to discount   Basic method of
    method           cost base by applying an        your capital gain        subtracting the cost
                     indexation factor based on                               base from the capital
                     CPI up to September 1999                                 proceeds

    When can you     For an asset owned for          For an asset owned for   You must use when the
    use the          12 months or more. Use          12 months or more        indexation and discount
    method           only for assets acquired                                 methods don't apply
                     before 11:45 am AEST on                                  (for example, if you
                     21 September 1999.                                       have bought and sold
                                                                              an asset within
                                                                              12 months).




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                          41
 Method type       Indexation method                 Discount method            'other' method

 How to            Apply the relevant                Subtract the cost base     Subtract the cost base
 calculate your    indexation factor, see CPI        from the capital           (or the amount
 capital gain      table at Appendix 2, then         proceeds, deduct any       specified by the
 using the         subtract the indexed cost         capital losses, then       relevant CGT event)
 method            base from the capital             reduce by the relevant     from the capital
                   proceeds, see worked              discount percentage, see   proceeds, see worked
                   example 13.                       worked example 13.         example 9.


The 'other' method
This is the simplest of the 3 methods. You must use the 'other' method to calculate your
capital gain if you have bought and sold your asset within 12 months or generally for CGT
events that don't involve an asset. In these cases, the indexation and discount methods
don't apply.

Generally, to use the 'other' method, you simply subtract your cost base (what the asset
cost you) from your capital proceeds (how much you sold it for). The amount of proceeds
left is your capital gain. For some types of CGT events, a cost base isn't relevant. See
Appendix 1 for the amounts to use.


   Example 9: calculating a capital gain using the 'other' method
   Marie-Anne bought a property for $250,000 under a contract dated 23 June 2025. The
   contract provided for the payment of a deposit of $25,000 on that date, with the
   balance of $225,000 to be paid on settlement on 4 August 2025.

   Marie-Anne paid stamp duty of $5,000 on 20 July 2025. On 4 August 2025, she
   received an account for solicitor's fees of $2,000 which she paid as part of the
   settlement process.

   Marie-Anne sold the property on 16 October 2025 (the day the contracts were
   exchanged) for $315,000. She incurred costs of $1,500 in solicitor's fees and $4,000 in
   agent’s commission.

   As she bought and sold her property within 12 months, Marie-Anne must use the
   'other' method to calculate her capital gain.

   34. The cost base is $262,500, made up of:
       –    purchase cost of $225,000 + deposit of $25,000 + $5,000 stamp duty
       –    solicitor's fees for purchase of property $2,000
       –    solicitor's fees for sale of property $1,500
       –    agent's commission $4,000.

   35. Marie-Anne works out her capital gain as follows:
       –    capital proceeds of $315,000
       –    subtract cost base of $262,500:
             $315,000 − $262,500 = $52,500
       –    the capital gain calculated using the 'other' method is $52,500.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                         42
    Assuming Marie-Anne hasn't made any other capital losses or capital gains in 2025–26,
    and doesn't have any unapplied net capital losses from earlier years, the net capital
    gain to be included at question 18 in her Tax return for individuals (supplementary
    section) 2026 is $52,500.


The indexation method
Use the indexation method to calculate your capital gain if:
•    a CGT event happened to an asset you acquired before 11:45 am AEST on 21 September
     1999
•    you owned the asset for 12 months or more.

If you're not a company and you meet the 2 conditions above and you wish to use the
indexation method, you must choose to do so, otherwise the discount method will apply. If
you're a company (other than a listed investment company) and the capital gain meets the
conditions listed above, you must use the indexation method to calculate the capital gain.
Specific rules affect certain assets of a life insurance company.

Under the indexation method, you increase each amount included in an element of the cost
base (other than those in the third element, costs of owning the asset) by an indexation
factor.

The indexation factor is worked out using the consumer price index (CPI) at Appendix 2.

If the CGT event happened on or after 11:45 am AEST on 21 September 1999, you can only
index the elements of your cost base up to 30 September 1999.

You use this formula:

    A=B÷C

Where:
•    A is the indexation factor
•    B is CPI for the quarter ending September 1999 (68.7)
•    C is CPI for the quarter in which expenditure was incurred.

If the CGT event happened before 11:45 am AEST on 21 September 1999, you use this
formula:

    A=B÷C

Where:
•    A is the indexation factor
•    B is CPI for the quarter when CGT event happened
•    C is CPI for the quarter in which expenditure was incurred.

Work out the indexation factor to 3 decimal places, rounding up if the 4th decimal place is
5 or more.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                  43
For most assets, you index expenditure from the date you incur it, even if you don't pay
some of the expenditure until a later time. However, there is an exception for partly paid
shares or units acquired on or after 16 August 1989. If the company or trust later makes a
call on the shares or units, you use the CPI for the quarter in which you made that later
payment.

There are some exceptions to the requirement that you must have owned an asset for at
least 12 months for indexation to apply. For example, you can use the indexation method if
you acquire either:
•    a CGT asset as a legal personal representative or a beneficiary of a deceased estate.
     The 12-month requirement is satisfied if the deceased acquired the asset 12 months or
     more before you disposed of it
•    an asset as the result of a marriage or relationship breakdown. You'll satisfy the 12-
     month requirement if the combined period your spouse and you owned the asset is
     more than 12 months.

The discount method
Use the discount method to calculate your capital gain if:
•    you're an individual, a trust or a complying super entity
•    a CGT event happens to an asset you own
•    the CGT event happened after 11:45 am AEST on 21 September 1999
•    you acquired the asset at least 12 months before the CGT event
•    you didn't choose to use the indexation method.

In determining whether you acquired the CGT asset at least 12 months before the CGT
event, you exclude both the day of acquisition and the day of the CGT event.

You can use the discount method to work out your capital gain from the property if you:
•    acquire a property and construct a building or make improvements to it that aren't
     separate assets, see Separate assets
•    owned the property for at least 12 months (even if you didn't construct the new building
     or improvements more than 12 months before the CGT event happened).

    Example 10: discount method
    Sally acquired a CGT asset on 2 February 2025. She is entitled to apply the CGT
    discount if a CGT event happened to that asset on or after 3 February 2026.


In certain circumstances, you may be eligible for the CGT discount even if you haven't
owned the asset for at least 12 months. For example:
•    You acquire a CGT asset as a legal personal representative or as a beneficiary of a
     deceased estate. The 12-month requirement is satisfied if the asset was acquired by the
     deceased either
     –   before 20 September 1985 and you disposed of it 12 months or more after they died




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                  44
    –    on or after 20 September 1985 and you disposed of it 12 months or more after they
         acquired it.
•   You acquired a CGT asset as the result of a marriage or relationship breakdown and roll-
    over applies. You'll satisfy the 12-month requirement if the combined period your
    spouse and you owned the asset was more than 12 months.
•   A CGT asset was compulsorily acquired, lost or destroyed and you acquired a roll-over
    replacement asset, you'll satisfy the 12-month requirement for the replacement asset if
    the period of ownership of the original asset and the replacement asset was at least
    12 months.

Certain capital gains are excluded
The CGT discount doesn't apply to capital gains from certain CGT events. The CGT discount
doesn't apply to these CGT events:
•   D1 Creating contractual or other rights
•   D2 Granting an option
•   D3 Granting a right to income from mining
•   E9 Creating a trust over future property
•   F1 Granting a lease
•   F2 Granting a long-term lease
•   F5 Lessor receives payment for changing a lease
•   H2 Receipt for an event relating to a CGT asset
•   J2 Change for replacement asset or improved asset after a roll-over under
    Subdivision 152-E
•   J5 Failure to acquire replacement asset and to incur 4th element expenditure after a
    roll-over under Subdivision 152-E
•   J6 Cost of acquisition of replacement asset or amount of 4th element expenditure, or
    both, not sufficient to cover disregarded capital gain
•   K10 Forex realisation gain.

The full list of CGT events is shown at Appendix 1.

If you make a capital gain from a CGT event that creates a new asset (for example, receiving
a payment for agreeing not to do something; that is, entering into a restrictive covenant) you
can't satisfy the 12-month ownership rule, so your CGT event doesn't qualify for the CGT
discount.

The CGT discount may be denied:
•   if the CGT event that gave rise to the capital gain occurred under an agreement that
    was made within 12 months of the acquisition of the asset
•   on the disposal of certain shares or trust interests in non-widely held companies and
    trusts, that is, those with fewer than 300 members
•   if an arrangement was entered into for the purposes of claiming the CGT discount under
    which an ‘income’ asset was converted into a ‘capital’ asset (conversion of income to
    capital) (Part IVA of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1936).


Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                45
If the home first used to produce income rule applies and the period between when you first
used the dwelling to produce income and the CGT event happening isn't at least 12 months,
the discount method isn't available.

Discount percentage
The discount percentage is the percentage by which you reduce your capital gain. You can
reduce the capital gain only after you have applied all the capital losses for 2025–26 and
any unapplied net capital losses from earlier years.

The discount percentage is 50% for individuals and trusts.

You may no longer receive the full 50% discount on capital gains made on taxable Australian
property if you're an individual, a beneficiary of a trust, or a partner in a partnership and
you're either:
•   a foreign or temporary resident
•   an Australian resident with a period of foreign residency or temporary residency.

An additional CGT discount of up to 10% may be available to Australian resident individuals
who provide affordable rental housing to people earning low to moderate income. This
increases the CGT discount percentage to up to 60% for qualifying owners of these
residential rental properties. To qualify, you must have provided affordable housing:
•   on or after 1 January 2018 for a period or periods totalling at least 3 years (1,095 days),
    which may be aggregate usage over different periods
•   either directly, or from a trust including where there is an interposed entity between you
    and the trust. The trust that provides the affordable housing and any interposed entities
    may be a trust, a managed investment trust or partnership, but can't be a public unit
    trust or super fund.

The number of days you may have provided affordable housing before 1 January 2018 will
not be counted.

For more information, see CGT discount for foreign residents.

Choosing the indexation or discount method
For assets you acquired before 11:45 am AEST on 21 September 1999 and have held for
12 months or more, you can choose to use the indexation method or the discount method to
calculate your capital gain.

There is no one factor to use as a basis to select the better option as it depends on:
•   the type of asset you own
•   how long you have owned it
•   the dates you owned it
•   past rates of inflation.

Because capital losses must be offset against capital gains before the discount is applied,
your choice may also depend on the amount of capital losses that you have available.

For more information, see Choices.



Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                  46
   Example 11: comparison of discount and indexation methods
   Justin sold some land and has a $10,000 capital gain under the discount method
   (before applying the CGT discount) or a $7,000 capital gain under the indexation
   method. If Justin has no capital losses, the discount method will produce the smaller
   capital gain (that is, $5,000).

   However, Justin also made a capital loss of $5,000 on the sale of some shares. He will
   be better off using the indexation method to work out the capital gain from the sale of
   his land. Under this method, his net capital gain is $2,000 (that is, $7,000 subtract
   $5,000). If he used the discount method, his net capital gain would be $2,500 (that is
   $10,000 subtract $5,000, multiplied by 50%).


Example 12 shows that applying one method to work out your capital gains on a whole
parcel of shares you acquired before September 1999 may not be to your advantage if you
have capital losses or net capital losses to apply.

In this situation, you'll get a better result if you apply the indexation method to sufficient
shares to absorb the capital loss (or as much of the capital loss as you can) and apply the
discount method to any remaining shares.


   Example 12: capital gains on shares where you also have capital losses
   Clare sold a parcel of 500 shares in March 2026 for $12,500, that is, for $25 each. She
   had acquired the shares in March 1995 for $7,500, that is, for $15 each, including
   stamp duty and brokerage. There was no brokerage on the sale. Clare had no other
   capital gains or capital losses in 2025–26, although she has $3,500 net capital losses
   carried forward from previous income years.

   Because Clare owned the shares for more than 12 months she can use the discount
   method or the indexation method to work out her capital gains, whichever gives her a
   better result. Clare decides to work out her net capital gain by applying both the
   discount method and the indexation method to the whole parcel of shares:


   Comparison of indexation and discount methods

    Calculation element        Using indexation method                  Using discount method
                               $                                        $

    Capital proceeds           12,500                                   12,500

    Cost base                  8,077 (see note 1)                       7,500

                               (acquisition cost × indexation factor)

    Capital gain               4,423                                    5,000

    subtract capital losses 3,500                                       3,500

    Subtotal                   923                                      1,500




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                     47
    CGT discount               Nil                              750

    Net capital gain           923                              750

   Note 1: $7,500 × 1.077 (indexation factor is 68.7 ÷ 63.8 = 1.077)

   However, because each share is a separate asset, Clare can use different methods to
   work out her capital gains for shares within the parcel. The lowest net capital gain
   would result from her applying the indexation method to the sale of 395 (see note 2
   below) shares, and the discount method to the remaining 105 shares. She works out
   her net capital gain as follows.

   36. Indexation method (395 shares), calculated as follows:
       –    capital proceeds ($25 each) are $9,875
       –    cost base (395 × $15 × 1.077 each) is $6,381
       –    capital gain is $3,494 ($9,875 − $6,381 = $3,494)
       –    subtract capital losses of $3,500
       –    capital gain/(loss) is -$6.

   37. Discount method (105 shares), calculated as follows:
       –    capital proceeds ($25 each) are $2,625
       –    cost base (105 × $15) is $1,575:
       –    capital gain is $1,050 ($2,625 − $1,575 = $1,050)
       –    subtract any remaining capital losses of $6 ($1,050 − $6 = $1,044)
       –    subtract the CGT discount of $522
       –    the Net capital gain is $522.

   Note 2: To calculate this, Clare worked out the capital gain made on each share using
   the indexation method ($4,423 ÷ 500 = $8.85) and divided the capital loss by this
   amount ($3,500 ÷ $8.85 = 395).


You can choose to calculate your capital gain using both methods to find out which gives
you the better result. This is shown for Val in example 13 and in the completed Capital gain
or capital loss worksheet 2026.


   Example 13: choosing the indexation or discount method
   Val bought a property for $150,000 under a contract dated 24 June 1991. The contract
   provided for the payment of a deposit of $15,000 on that date, with the balance of
   $135,000 to be paid on settlement on 5 August 1991.

   She paid stamp duty of $5,000 on 20 July 1991. On 5 August 1991, she received an
   account for solicitor's fees of $2,000, which she paid as part of the settlement
   process.

   She sold the property on 15 October 2025 (the day the contracts were exchanged) for
   $350,000. She incurred costs of $1,500 in solicitor's fees and $4,000 in agent's
   commission.

   38. Val’s capital gain calculated using the indexation method:



Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                               48
       –    deposit × indexation factor
             $15,000 × 1.164 = $17,460
             (indexation factor is 68.7 ÷ 59.0 = 1.164)
       –    balance × indexation factor
             $135,000 × 1.164 = $157,140
       –    stamp duty × indexation factor
             $5,000 × 1.159 = $5,795
             (indexation factor is 68.7 ÷ 59.3 = 1.159)
       –    solicitor's fees for purchase of property × indexation factor
             $2,000 × 1.159 = $2,318
       –    solicitor's fees for sale of property
             $1,500 (indexation doesn't apply)
       –    agent's commission
             $4,000 (indexation doesn't apply)
       –    the cost base total is $188,213.

   39. Val works out her capital gain as follows:
       –    capital proceeds are $350,000
       –    subtract cost base of $188,213
       –    Val's total current year capital gain using this method is $161,787.

   Assuming Val hasn't made any other capital losses or capital gains in 2025–26 and
   doesn't have any unapplied net capital losses from earlier years, her net capital gain
   using the indexation method is $161,787.

   40. Val’s capital gain calculated using the discount method:
       –    deposit $15,000
       –    balance $135,000
       –    stamp duty $5,000
       –    solicitor's fees for purchase of property $2,000
       –    solicitor's fees for sale of property $1,500
       –    agent's commission $4,000
       –    total cost base is $162,500.

   41. Val works out her capital gain as follows:
       –    capital proceeds are $350,000
       –    subtract cost base of $162,500
       –    total current year capital gain using this method before applying discount is
            $187,500
       –    subtract CGT discount (as Val has no capital losses) of $93,750
       –    total net capital gain is $93,750.

   Val considers the discount method gives her the better result. Val will write the amount
   worked out using the discount method on her tax return rather than the amount
   worked out using the indexation method.

   The Capital gain or capital loss worksheet 2026 shows how Val might complete the
   worksheet using both methods.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                  49
How to calculate a capital loss

   Example 14: calculating a capital loss
   Antonio acquired a new income-producing asset on 28 September 2001 for $100,000,
   including stamp duty and legal costs. He sold it for $90,000 in November 2025. During
   the period he owned it, he was allowed capital works deductions of $7,500. Antonio
   works out his capital loss as follows.

   42. Cost base of $100,000.

   43. Subtract capital works deductions of $7,500.

   44. The reduced cost base is $92,500.

   45. Subtract the capital proceeds of $90,000.

   46. The total capital loss is $2,500.




   Example 15: calculating a reduced cost base and capital loss
   In July 1998, Chandra bought 800 shares at $3 per share. He incurred brokerage and
   stamp duty of $100. In December 2025, Chandra sold all 800 shares for $2.50 per
   share. He incurred brokerage of $75. He made a capital loss, calculated as follows.

   47. To calculate the reduced cost base:
       –    purchase price in July 1998 of $2,400
       –    add brokerage and stamp duty in July 1998 of $100
       –    add brokerage in December 2025 of $75
       –    the reduced cost base is $2,575.

   48. To calculate the capital loss:
       –    reduced cost base of $2,575
       –    subtract capital proceeds (800 × $2.50) of $2,000
       –    the total capital loss is $575.


However, the reduced cost base isn't relevant for some types of CGT events. In these
cases, see Appendix 1 for the amounts to use for the particular CGT event.

Reduced cost base
You can't index a reduced cost base.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                               50
Keeping CGT records
Check what records will help you correctly work out the amount of capital
gain or loss you have made from a CGT event.

What records do you need to keep?
You must keep records of everything that affects your capital gains and capital losses.
Penalties can apply if you don't keep the records for at least 5 years after the relevant CGT
event. If you use information from those records in a later tax return, you may have to keep
records for longer. If you have applied a net capital loss, you should generally keep your
records of the CGT event that resulted in the loss until the end of any period of review for
the income year in which the net capital loss is fully applied.

Keeping good records can help your beneficiaries reduce the impact of CGT after you die. If
you leave an asset to another person, the asset may be subject to CGT when a CGT event
happens to that asset in the future. For example, if your daughter (the beneficiary) sells the
shares (the asset) you have left her in your will.

For more information, see Taxation Determination TD 2007/2 Income tax: should a taxpayer
who has incurred a tax loss or made a net capital loss for an income year retain records
relevant to the ascertainment of that loss only for the record retention period prescribed
under income tax law?
You must keep records of every act, transaction, event or circumstance that may be
relevant to working out whether you have made a capital gain or capital loss from a CGT
event. It doesn't matter whether the CGT event has already happened or whether it may
happen.

The records must be in English (or be readily accessible or translatable into English) and
must show:
•   the nature of the act, transaction, event or circumstance
•   the day it happened
•   who did the act or who were the parties to the transaction
•   how the act, transaction, event or circumstance is relevant to working out the capital
    gain or capital loss.

The following are examples of records you may need to keep:
•   receipts of purchase or transfer
•   details of interest on money you borrowed relating to this asset
•   records of agent, accountant, legal and advertising costs
•   receipts for insurance costs, rates and land taxes
•   any market valuations
•   receipts for the cost of maintenance, repairs and modifications
•   accounts showing brokerage on shares.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                 51
You should also keep records to establish whether you have claimed an income tax
deduction for an item of expenditure. In many cases, if you have claimed a deduction for an
amount, the expenditure may not be included in the cost base or reduced cost base of a
CGT asset.

Records relating to real estate
Real estate can include the family home, vacant blocks of land, business premises, rental
properties, holiday houses and hobby farms.

Even though your family home is usually exempt, if you acquired it on or after 20 September
1985, try to keep all records relating to the home, just as you would for other items of real
estate. If the home ceases to be fully exempt at some time in the future, you'll need to know
the full cost of the home so that you don't pay more CGT than necessary. If you don't have
sufficient records, reconstructing them later could be difficult. For details of when your
home may not be fully exempt, see Real estate and main residence.

Keep a copy of the purchase contract and all receipts for expenses relating to the purchase
of the property such as:
•   stamp duty
•   legal fees
•   survey costs
•   valuation fees.

Also keep all records relating to the CGT event and all relevant expenses, for example, the
sale contract and records of legal fees and stamp duty.

Keep a record of the following that you incurred during your period of ownership:
•   capital expenditure on improvements
•   costs of owning the property
•   capital expenditure on maintaining title or right to it.

These costs may form part of the cost base in working out whether you have made a capital
gain or capital loss at the time the CGT event happens.

Capital expenditure on improvements may include building an extension, addition or
improvement, including initial repairs.

Examples of costs of owning real estate include interest, rates and land taxes, insurance
premiums and cost of repairs or replacing broken items. You only include such costs if you
acquired the CGT asset on or after 21 August 1991 and if you haven't claimed, and can't
claim, a tax deduction for them.

If the property is your home and you use it to produce income (for example, by renting out
part or all of it), you'll need to keep records of the period the home is producing income and
the proportion of the home you have used to produce income.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                  52
If, after 20 August 1996, you use your home for income-producing purposes for the first
time, you'll be taken to have acquired your home at that time for its market value. You'll use
this as your acquisition cost for the purpose of calculating a capital gain or capital loss at the
time the CGT event happens. You'll still need to keep details of expenses relating to your
home after the date that it started producing income.

See Marriage or relationship breakdown about records you may need to obtain from your
spouse if your marriage or relationship has broken down and a CGT roll-over applies on the
transfer of real estate.

Records relating to shares in companies and units in unit trusts
Most of the records you need to keep regarding your disposal of shares in companies or
units in unit trusts (including managed funds), will be given to you by the company, the unit
trust manager or your stockbroker. It is important for you to keep everything they give you
on your shares and units.

These records will generally provide the following important information:
•   the date of purchase of the shares or units
•   the amount paid to purchase the shares or units
•   details of any non-assessable payments made to you during the time you owned the
    shares or units
•   the date and amount of any calls if shares were partly paid
•   the sale price if you sell them
•   any commissions paid to brokers when you buy or sell them.

There are special CGT rules for certain shares and units, which may affect the records you
keep. For example, bonus shares and units, rights and options, employee shares and eligible
shares in an ESIC.

For more information, see Investments in shares and units.

Records relating to bonus shares
To be safe, if you have received any bonus shares on or after 20 September 1985, keep all
the documents the company gives you.

For any bonus shares issued before 1 July 1987, you need to know when the original shares
were acquired. If you acquired them on or after 20 September 1985, you'll also need to know
what they cost. Flowchart 3.1 in Appendix 3 summarises the different rules applying to the
treatment of bonus shares.

Keep a record of any amounts you paid to acquire the bonus shares and any amounts taxed
as a dividend when they were issued.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                   53
Records relating to shares in an ESIC
If you invested in an ESIC, you may be entitled to the early stage investor tax incentives,
including the modified CGT treatment for your shares. You should keep records to:
•   support your entitlement to the incentives, for example, that you're an eligible investor
    and the company qualifies as an ESIC at the relevant test time
•   show when you acquired the shares and, if disposed of within 12 months or after
    10 years, how you have calculated your capital gain or capital loss
•   support the market value of the shares if you have continuously held them for 10 years
•   support your claim in respect of the modified CGT treatment and CGT roll-overs in
    relation to eligible shares.

For more information, see Shares in an early stage innovation company.

Records relating to inheriting an asset
If you inherited an asset as a beneficiary of the estate of a person who died on or after
20 September 1985, you may need to obtain information from the executor or trustee.

If the deceased person acquired the asset before 20 September 1985, or an asset passes to
you as the trustee of a Special Disability Trust (irrespective of the date the deceased
acquired the asset), you need to know:
•   the market value of the asset at the date of the person’s death
•   the amount of any relevant costs incurred by the executor or trustee.

This is the amount that the asset is taken to have cost you. If the executor or trustee has a
valuation of the asset, get a copy of that valuation report. Otherwise, you'll need to get your
own valuation.

If the asset you inherit was acquired by the deceased person on or after 20 September
1985, you need to know full details of all relevant costs incurred by the deceased person
and by the executor or trustee. Get those details from the executor or trustee.

Inheriting a main residence
If you inherit a dwelling that was the deceased’s main residence (for example, a house), any
capital gain on its subsequent disposal may be exempt. However, until the exemption is
certain, you should keep records of relevant costs incurred by you, the deceased or their
trustee or executor.

You don't need to keep records of the deceased’s costs if:
•   you inherited the dwelling after 20 August 1996
•   the dwelling was the deceased’s main residence just before they died
•   the dwelling wasn't being used to produce income at the time of death.

In these circumstances, you'll be taken to have acquired the dwelling at its market value at
the date of death. If the executor or trustee has a valuation of the asset, get a copy of that
valuation report. Otherwise you'll need to get your own valuation.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                    54
If you're a beneficiary of a deceased estate and a CGT event happens to your residential
property in Australia that you inherited from an excluded foreign resident (that is, a person
who was a foreign resident for a continuous period of more than 6 years), you may no
longer be entitled to claim the main residence exemption for the deceased’s ownership
period. This doesn't apply to properties held before 7.30pm AEST on 9 May 2017 if both of
the following apply:
•   the CGT event occurred on or before 30 June 2020
•   you, the deceased or their legal personal representative held an ownership interest in
    the asset at all times during the period immediately before 9 May 2017 until immediately
    before the CGT event.

For more information, see Inherited main residence.

Records relating to foreign resident capital gains withholding
When the foreign resident capital gains withholding amount has been paid, we'll issue
confirmation to both the vendor and the purchaser. The vendor will be able to use this
confirmation to help them complete their tax return to claim a credit for the foreign resident
capital gains withholding amount.

Asset registers
You can choose to enter information from your CGT records into an asset register. If you
keep an asset register, you may be able to discard records that you might otherwise need to
keep for a long time.

If you choose to keep an asset register, transfer the following information to it from the
records you generally need to keep for CGT purposes:
•   the date the asset was acquired
•   the cost of the asset
•   a description, amount and date for each cost associated with the purchase of the asset,
    for example, stamp duty and legal fees
•   the date the CGT event happened to the asset
•   the capital proceeds received when the CGT event happened.

This information must be certified by a registered tax agent or a person approved by the
Commissioner.

If you use an asset register, you must keep the documents from which you have transferred
the information for 5 years from the date the relevant asset register entry is certified. You
must keep the asset register entries for 5 years from the date the related CGT event
happens. Keep the asset register for a longer period if you need to substantiate any carried
forward net capital losses, for 5 years after any CGT event where you have applied any
capital loss against capital gains.

For more information, see Taxation Ruling TR 2002/10 Income tax: capital gains tax: asset
register.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                    55
Exceptions
You don't need to keep records if, for any CGT event, a capital gain or capital loss is
disregarded in full. For example, you don't need to keep records for exempt assets such as
cars and motorcycles as the capital gain or loss is disregarded in full.

It is never too late to keep records
If you acquired assets on or after 20 September 1985 and didn't keep records, or your
records have inadvertently been destroyed, you can still do something about it.

If you bought real estate, your solicitor or real estate agent may have copies of most of the
records you need. You should be able to get copies if you ask for them.

If you made improvements to an investment property, for example, if you built an extension,
then ask for a copy of the builder’s receipt for payment.

If you bought shares in a company or units in a unit trust, your stockbroker or investment
adviser may be able to give you the information you need.

If you received an asset as a gift and you didn't get a market valuation at the time, a
professional valuer can tell you what its market value was at the relevant date.

The main thing is to get as many details as soon as possible so you can reconstruct your
records. Make sure you keep sufficient records in the future.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                 56
Trust distributions and your CGT position
Explains how distributions from trusts (including managed funds) can affect
your CGT position.

Distributions from a trust
Distributions from a trust include managed funds, which are property trusts, share trusts,
equity trusts, growth trusts, imputation trusts and balanced trusts.

Distributions from trusts can include different amounts, but only the following amounts are
relevant for CGT purposes:
•   distributions of all or a part of the trust's income where the trust’s net income for tax
    purposes includes a net capital gain
•   distributions or other entitlements described as being referable to a specific capital gain
    or gains
•   distributions of non-assessable amounts.

From 2024, if you have received a capital gain distribution from a trust, you'll also need to
complete a Trust income schedule which details each distribution that you've received.

You're treated as having made a capital gain or gains if you're 'specifically entitled' to all or
part of a trust's capital gain and that capital gain is reflected in the trust's net income for tax
purposes.

Additionally, if there is an amount of a capital gain reflected in the net income of the trust for
tax purposes to which no entity is specifically entitled, that amount will be proportionately
assessed to beneficiaries in accordance with their 'adjusted Division 6 percentage' (which is
based on their proportionate entitlement to certain income of the trust), or otherwise to the
trustee.

In certain circumstances where you would be treated as having made a capital gain but are
unable to benefit from the gain within a set period, an eligible trustee may elect to be
assessed on the capital gain on your behalf.

In June 2011, amendments were enacted that enable the streaming of capital gains and
franked dividends to beneficiaries, subject to relevant integrity provisions. For managed
investment trusts (MITs) which haven't previously made an election to apply the
amendments, the amendments start to apply from 2017–18. For MITs which have previously
made an election to apply the amendments, the amendments continue to apply in 2017–18
and later income years.

These amendments don't apply to MITs that are attribution managed investment trusts
(AMITs). They're subject to the separate attribution rules that enable capital gains and
franked distributions to be attributed to members for tax purposes.

Non-assessable payments mostly affect the cost base of units in a unit trust (including
managed funds) but can in some cases create a capital gain. Non-assessable payments to
beneficiaries of a discretionary trust won't give rise to capital gains.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                     57
Trustees, including fund managers, may use different terms to describe the methods of
calculation and other terms used in this guide. For example, they may use the term ‘non-
discount gains’ when they refer to capital gains worked out using the indexation and 'other'
methods.

Attribution managed investment trusts
An eligible MIT may choose to apply the attribution rules in Division 276 of the Income Tax
Assessment Act 1997. Where that choice is made, the MIT becomes known as an attribution
managed investment trust (AMIT).

Generally, those rules apply to 'attribute' amounts to each member based on their interest in
the AMIT, rather than a 'present entitlement' to the net income of the trust or the amount
actually paid.

The attribution rules ensure that amounts from the trust retain their tax character as they
flow through to you. This is so that for taxation purposes it is treated as if you had earned
the income directly in your own right. In relation to capital gains, those rules mean you'll
treat the capital gains component of your trust income as your own capital gain.

These rules also mean that the cost base of your units in an AMIT may have annual upward
or downward adjustments.

Your share of trust amounts attributed to you is shown on your member statement, which
for an AMIT is called an AMIT member annual statement (AMMA) (similar to the standard
distribution statement provided by a managed fund).

Otherwise, for members (unit holders) of an AMIT, there will be little discernible difference
to the way income is distributed to you.

For more information, see Cost base adjustments for AMIT members.

Corporate Collective Investment Vehicles
From 1 July 2022, a new form of collective investment vehicle is available for funds
management activities – a corporate collective investment vehicle (CCIV).

From a regulatory perspective, a CCIV is a registered company that comprises one or more
'sub-funds' and is operated by a single corporate director. A sub-fund of a CCIV is all or part
of the CCIV's business that is registered as a sub-fund of the CCIV by ASIC. However, the
tax framework treats each CCIV sub-fund as a separate fixed unit trust. A CCIV sub-fund is
subject to the existing rules for the taxation of trusts.

A CCIV sub-fund trust is taxed as an AMIT for an income year under the attribution regime in
Division 276 of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 if it meets certain AMIT eligibility
criteria. We call this an ‘attribution CCIV sub-fund trust’.

An attribution CCIV sub-fund trust, as a deemed AMIT, is required to provide an AMMA
statement to each of its members within 3 months of the end of the income year. If a CCIV
sub-fund trust doesn't meet the requirements to be an AMIT and isn't a public trading trust,
it will be taxed under Division 6 of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1936 and will provide
distribution information to beneficiaries through a standard distribution statement (SDS).




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                    58
Capital gains made by a trust
The general trust taxation provisions in Division 6 of Part III of the Income Tax Assessment
Act 1936 (Division 6) give way to specific rules in Division 115-C of the Income Tax
Assessment Act 1997. These rules ensure that, where permitted by the trust deed, the
capital gains of a trust (other than an AMIT) can be effectively streamed to beneficiaries for
tax purposes by making them 'specifically entitled' to those gains. Generally, a beneficiary
will be considered specifically entitled to an amount of a capital gain if the beneficiary has
received (or can reasonably be expected to receive) an amount referrable to that gain, and
certain recording conditions are satisfied.

A beneficiary specifically entitled to a capital gain will generally be assessed in respect of
that gain, regardless of whether the benefit they receive or are expected to receive is
income or capital of the trust.

Capital gains to which no beneficiary is specifically entitled will be allocated proportionately
to beneficiaries based on their present entitlement to income of the trust estate (excluding
amounts of capital gains and franked distributions to which any entity is specifically
entitled). This proportion is known as the beneficiary's 'adjusted Division 6 percentage'. If
there is some income to which no beneficiary is entitled (apart from capital gains and/or
franked distributions to which any entity is specifically entitled) the trustee may be assessed
under section 99 or 99A of the ITAA 1936.

The trust provisions also allow the trustee of a resident trust to choose to be assessed on a
capital gain, provided no beneficiary has received or benefited from any amount relating to
the gain during 2025–26 or within 2 months of 30 June 2026.

Question 13 in the supplementary tax return for individuals
Question 13 in the Tax return for individuals (supplementary section) 2026 tells you to
exclude net capital gains from the amount of trust income you write at question 13 – label U
in your supplementary tax return. In your statement of distribution or advice, the trust should
state your share of the trust’s net capital gain. Exclude only so much of the trust's net capital
gain that would otherwise form part of your share of the trust income.

Follow the steps below to answer question 13 for beneficiaries of trusts.

Step 1: Determine your share of the capital gain of the trust

You'll need to determine whether you have a share of each capital gain made by the trust
that has been included in the trust's net income for tax purposes. For every capital gain you
have a share of, your statement of distribution or advice from the trust should advise you of:
•   your share of that gain
•   how much of the net income of the trust for tax purposes relates to each gain (or what
    is the 'attributable gain' to which your share relates)
•   the type of capital gain to which your share relates and the method used by the trustee
    to calculate it (including any CGT discount or small business CGT concessions applied)
•   your share of any credit for a foreign resident capital gains withholding amount.

Your share of a capital gain is any amount of the capital gain to which you're specifically
entitled plus your adjusted Division 6 percentage share of any amount of the capital gain to
which no beneficiary is specifically entitled.


Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                     59
These rules don't apply to a distribution of a capital gain by an AMIT.

For more information, see Managed investment trusts.

Step 2: Divide by the total capital gain

That amount is then divided by the total capital gain to give you your ‘fraction’ of the total
capital gain.

Step 3: Multiply your fraction of the capital gain by the trust's taxable income relating to
the capital gain

Your fraction is then multiplied by the net income for tax purposes of the trust that relates to
the capital gain. The result is your ‘attributable gain’.

In certain circumstances where the trust's net capital gain and total net franked distributions
exceed the net income of the trust for tax purposes, the amount of the trust's taxable
income relating to the capital gain is rateably reduced. This ensures that beneficiaries and
the trustee can't be assessed on more than the total net income of the trust.

Extra capital gains you're taken to have made
If you're a beneficiary who is taken to have an 'attributable gain' (your share of a trust’s
capital gain included in its net income for tax purposes), you're taken to have made extra
capital gains in addition to any other capital gains you may have made from your own CGT
events.

These extra capital gains are taken into account in working out your net capital. You include
them at step 2 in:
•   question 18 Capital gains 2026 – for individuals
•   Capital gains tax schedule and instructions 2026 – for companies, trusts and funds.

In order to work out the amount of extra capital gains that are taken into account in working
out your own net capital gain, you'll need to know the method used by the trustee in
calculating the trust’s capital gains that were included in the trust’s net capital gain. Your
statement of distribution or advice should show this information.

If you're a unit holder in a managed fund, the trustee or manager will generally advise you of
your share of the trust’s net capital gain, together with details of your share of any other
income distributed to you.

In other cases, the trustee may have advised you what your share is or you may need to
contact them to obtain details.

Trust distributions to which the CGT concessions apply
Your 'attributable gain' is then grossed-up as appropriate for any CGT concessions (the
general CGT discount or the small business 50% reduction) applied by the trustee to that
capital gain. You have an extra capital gain equal to the grossed-up amount.

Where the trustee reduced the capital gain by the CGT discount or the small business 50%
active asset reduction, you need to gross up your 'attributable gain' by multiplying it by 2.
This grossed-up amount is an extra capital gain.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                     60
You multiply by 4 your attributable gain that the trust has reduced by both the CGT discount
and the small business 50% active asset reduction. This grossed-up amount is an extra
capital gain.

If the capital gain hasn't been reduced by either the CGT discount or the small business 50%
active asset reduction, then your 'attributable gain' is an extra capital gain.

You're then able to reduce your extra capital gains by any current or prior year capital losses
that you have, and then apply any relevant discounts to work out your own net capital gain.

No double taxation
You're not taxed twice on these extra capital gains because you don't include your capital
gains from trusts in your tax return.

   Example 16: applying the trust provisions
   Step 1: Determine the beneficiary’s share of the capital gain of the trust

   The Cropper Trust generated $100 of rent and a $500 capital gain (which was a
   discount capital gain). The trust also had a capital loss of $100. The trust deed doesn't
   define ‘income’ and therefore capital gains don't form part of the trust income. As a
   result, the income of the trust estate is $100 (being an amount equal to the rent),
   whereas the net income of the trust for tax purposes is $300. The $300 net income for
   tax purposes comprises the $200 net capital gain (which is the $500 capital gain less
   the $100 capital loss, reduced by the 50% CGT discount) plus the $100 rent income.

   The trustee resolves to distribute $200 related to the capital gain (after absorbing the
   capital loss) to Shane and the $100 of rent to Andrea.

   Shane is specifically entitled to 50% of the $500 capital gain because he can
   reasonably be expected to receive the economic benefit of 50% of the $400 capital
   gain remaining ($200) after accounting for the $100 capital loss. Shane’s share of the
   capital gain equals the amount to which he is specifically entitled namely $250 (50% of
   the $500 capital gain).

   Andrea’s share of the capital gain is also $250 because, being entitled to all of the
   $100 income of the trust (none of the capital gain being treated as trust income), she
   has an adjusted Division 6 percentage of 100% and there is $250 of the $500 capital
   gain to which no one is specifically entitled.

   Step 2: Divide by the total capital gain

   Shane divides his share of the capital gain ($250) by the total capital gain ($500) and
   therefore has a fraction share of one-half of the capital gain.

   Andrea divides her share of the capital gain ($250) by the total capital gain ($500) and
   therefore also has a fraction share of one-half of the capital gain.

   Step 3: Multiply the beneficiary’s fraction of the capital gain by the trust’s taxable
   income relating to the capital gain

   The net income of the trust for tax purposes relating to the capital gain is $200.

   Shane’s attributable gain is $100 ($200 × one-half).



Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                   61
   Andrea’s attributable gain is $100 ($200 × one-half).

   Step 4: Gross up the amount for CGT discounts applied by the trustee

   Shane is required to double his attributable gain of $100 to an extra capital gain of
   $200 because the trustee had applied the 50% CGT discount.

   Andrea similarly doubles her attributable gain to $200 which is her extra capital gain.

   Both Shane and Andrea will take their extra capital gain of $200 into account in
   working out their own net capital gain at question 18. Shane and Andrea are individuals
   entitled to claim the 50% CGT discount. Neither have other capital gains or capital
   losses of their own to apply against their extra capital gains. Therefore, after applying
   the 50% CGT discount to their $200 extra capital gain, they will have made a net
   capital gain of $100 ($200 extra capital gain × 50% = $100). They will write $100 at
   question 18 Capital gains – label A in their supplementary tax returns. They also write
   $200 (which is $100 grossed-up) at question 18 – label H.

   Note that Shane and Andrea's statement of distribution or advice from the trust
   advised each of them that the trust had made a capital gain of $500, that only $200 of
   this had been included in the net income of the trust estate for tax purposes, that the
   50% discount had been applied and that their share of the gain was $250.
   Alternatively, it could have advised them that they each had an extra capital gain of
   $200 that was a discount capital gain.


Applying the concessions
You must use the same method as the trust to calculate your capital gain.

This means you can't apply the CGT discount to capital gains distributed to you from the
trust which were calculated using the indexation method or 'other' method.

You can only apply the small business 50% active asset reduction to grossed-up capital
gains to which the trust applied that concession.

   Example 17: distribution where the trust claimed concessions
   Serge is the sole beneficiary in the Shadows Unit Trust. His statement of distribution or
   advice from the trust shows that his 100% share of the net income of the Shadows Unit
   Trust for income tax purposes was $2,000. The $2,000 includes a net capital gain of
   $250 (made of a $1,000 capital gain that was reduced by the CGT discount and the
   small business 50% active asset reduction).

   His statement advises him that he has a 100% share of the capital gain which is
   $1,000.

   Because he has a 100% share of the capital gain, Serge will have an 'attributable gain'
   of $250 (that is, the whole of the net income of the trust estate for tax purposes that
   relates to the gain).

   Due to the application of the CGT discount and the small business 50% active asset
   reduction, Serge then grosses up his 'attributable gain' of $250 by multiplying it by 4 to
   $1,000 which is his extra capital gain.



Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                    62
    Serge has also made a capital loss of $100 from the sale of shares.

    He calculates his own net capital gain as follows.

    49. Serge’s extra capital gain (that is, his $250 attributable gain × 4) is $1,000.

    50. Subtract capital losses of $100.

    51. The capital gains before applying discounts is $900.

    52. Apply the CGT discount of 50% ($450).

    53. Apply the 50% active asset reduction of $225.

    54. The total net capital gain is $225.

    Serge will write $1,000 at question 18 – label H in his supplementary tax return, which
    is his total current year capital gain. The net capital gain he will write at question 18 –
    label A in his supplementary tax return is $225. He will write a trust distribution of
    $1,750 ($2,000 − $250) at question 13 – label U in his supplementary tax return.


Investors in managed funds
If you're a unit holder in a managed fund and have received a distribution from a trust that
includes a net capital gain, take your share of that net capital gain into account in working
out your own net capital gain for the year, to the extent that it doesn't exceed the overall net
amount of your distribution from the trust; see examples 18 and 19.

Your statement of distribution or advice should show your share of the trust net capital gain
and other information relevant to that gain, including your share of any credit for a foreign
resident capital gains withholding amount.

If your statement shows that your share of the trust’s net capital gain is more than the
overall net amount of your distribution, then there is a limit on the amount of the capital gain
component you exclude from question 13 Partnerships and trusts – label L in your
supplementary tax return. In this situation, you can't exclude an amount greater than the
overall net amount of your distribution from the trust; see examples 18 and 19. The amount
of your share of the trust’s net capital gain you exclude from the amount at question 13
Partnerships and trusts – label L is used in working out your capital gain. If you receive a
distribution from more than one trust, this applies to each distribution.

Trust distributions to which the CGT concessions apply
Your statement should show whether any discounts or reductions were applied by the
trustee in determining the amount of the capital gain.

If you have a share of a trust’s net capital gain, you're taken to have made extra capital gains
in addition to any other capital gains you may have made from your own CGT events.

These extra capital gains are taken into account in working out your net capital gain for
2025–26. You include them at step 2 in:
•    question 18 Capital gains, CGT worksheets – for individuals
•    Capital gains tax schedule and instructions 2026 – for companies, trusts and funds.



Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                      63
You need to know whether the trustee applied any discounts or reductions in calculating the
capital gain to which your share relates in order to work out the correct amount to include in
your own net capital gain calculation.

Where the trustee reduced one or more capital gains by the CGT discount or the small
business 50% active asset reduction, you need to gross up your share of any such capital
gain by multiplying it by 2. This grossed-up amount is your extra capital gain that you
include in your own net capital gain calculation.

You multiply by 4 your share of any capital gain from a trust that the trustee has reduced by
both the CGT discount and the small business 50% active asset reduction. This grossed-up
amount is your extra capital gain that you include in your own net capital gain calculation.

If your share of a capital gain from a trust is attributable to a capital gain that the trustee
hasn't reduced by one of these concessions, that amount is your extra capital gain. You
include this amount in your own net capital gain calculation.

This calculation lets you reduce your extra capital gains by any current or prior year capital
losses that you have, and then apply any relevant discounts to work out your own net
capital gain; see example 19.

No double taxation
You're not taxed twice on these extra capital gains because you didn't include your capital
gains from trusts at question 13 in your supplementary tax return.

   Example 18: capital gain greater than share of trust net income and capital gain was
   discounted
   Daniel’s statement of distribution or advice from a managed fund (other than an AMIT)
   shows that his share of the net income of that trust for tax purposes was $7,000.

   This is made up of his $3,000 proportionate share of the trust’s non-primary
   production loss and his $10,000 proportionate share of the trust’s net capital gain to
   which the trust applied the 50% CGT discount. Daniel also made a $2,000 capital loss
   during the year on the sale of some shares. He doesn't have any other trust
   distributions for the year.

   Daniel writes zero at question 13 Partnerships and Trusts in his supplementary tax
   return. He takes $14,000 (that is, the $7,000 remaining of his share of the capital gain
   from the trust grossed-up) into account in working out his net capital gain at
   question 18. Therefore, after subtracting the capital losses from the grossed-up capital
   gain:
   •   he is taken to have made ($14,000 − $2,000 = $12,000)
   •   he applies the 50% CGT discount ($12,000 × 50% = $6,000)
   •   he writes $6,000 at question 18 Capital gains – label A in his supplementary tax
       return
   •   he writes $14,000 ($7,000 grossed-up) at question 18 – label H.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                      64
    Example 19: capital gain greater than share of trust net income and capital gain
    wasn't discounted
    Debra’s statement of distribution or advice from a Managed Fund (other than an AMIT)
    shows that her share of the net income of that trust for tax purposes was $2,000.

    This is made up of her $5,000 proportionate share of the trust’s primary production
    loss, her $2,000 proportionate share of the trust’s non-primary production income and
    her $5,000 proportionate share of the trust’s net capital gain. The trust’s net capital
    gain doesn't include any discounted gains.

    At question 13 Partnerships and Trusts in her supplementary tax return, Debra will
    write $5,000 loss from primary production at label L and $5,000 non-primary
    production income at label U (that is, $2,000 non-primary production income plus
    sufficient net capital gain [$3,000] to offset the loss from primary production).

    Assuming Debra has no other capital gains or capital losses, she will write $2,000
    ($5,000 − $3,000) at question 18 Capital gains – label H and A in her supplementary
    tax return.


Non-assessable payments from a trust
Trusts often make non-assessable payments to beneficiaries.

If a profit made by the trust isn't assessable, any part of that profit distributed to a
beneficiary will also be non-assessable in most cases, for example, a share of a profit made
on the sale of property acquired by the trust before 20 September 1985.

However, if you receive non-assessable payments from a trust, you may need to make cost
base adjustments to your units or trust interest. Those adjustments will affect the amount of
any capital gain or capital loss you make on the unit or interest, for example, when you sell
it.

Non-assessable payments may be made over a number of years. If non-assessable
payments exceed your cost base, you may also make a capital gain equal to the excess in
the year the excess is paid to you.

Non-assessable payments from a managed fund to a unit holder are common and may be
shown on your statement from the fund as:
•    tax-free amounts
•    CGT-concession amounts
•    tax-exempted amounts
•    tax-deferred amounts.

If you're a beneficiary in a trust which is subject to the trust provisions relating to 'streaming'
of capital gains and franked distributions, even if you're distributed an amount that is
described as a CGT concession amount, you may be taken to have made a capital gain.
You'll need to include this in your own net capital gain calculation.

You may need to adjust the cost base and reduced cost base of your units depending on
the kind of non-assessable payment you received. If you hold an interest in an AMIT, the


Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                    65
adjustment may either increase or decrease your cost base and reduced cost base. For
more information, see Cost-base adjustments for AMIT members.

Your statement of distribution or advice should show amounts and other information
relevant to your cost base or reduced cost base.

Tax-free amounts relate to certain tax concessions received by the fund which enable it to
pay greater distributions to its unit holders. If your statement shows any tax-free amounts,
you adjust the reduced cost base (but not your cost base) of your units by these amounts.
Payments of amounts associated with building allowances which were made before 1 July
2001 were treated as tax-free amounts.

CGT-concession amounts relate to the CGT discount component of any actual distribution.
Such amounts don't affect your cost base and reduced cost base if they were received after
30 June 2001. A CGT-concession amount received before 1 July 2001 is taken off the cost
base and reduced cost base.

Tax-exempted amounts are generally made up of:
•   exempt income of the fund
•   amounts on which the fund has already paid tax
•   income you had to repay to the fund.

Such amounts don't affect your cost base and reduced cost base.

Tax-deferred amounts are other non-assessable amounts, including indexation received by
the fund on its capital gains and accounting differences in income. You adjust the cost base
and reduced cost base of your units by these amounts. Payments associated with building
allowances which are made on or after 1 July 2001 are treated as tax-deferred amounts.

If the tax-deferred amount is greater than the cost base of your units, you include the
excess as a capital gain. You can use the indexation method if you bought your units before
11:45 am AEST on 21 September 1999. However, if you do so, you can't use the discount
method to work out your capital gain when you later sell the units or trust interest.

Capital loss
You can't make a capital loss from a non-assessable payment.

As a result of certain stapling arrangements, some investors in managed funds have
received units which have a very low cost base. The payment of certain non-assessable
amounts in excess of the cost base of the units will result in these investors making a capital
gain.

Non-assessable payments under a demerger
If you receive a non-assessable payment under an eligible demerger, you don't deduct the
payment from the cost base and the reduced cost base of your units or trust interest.
Instead, you adjust your cost base and reduced cost base according to the demerger rules.

You may make a capital gain on the non-assessable payment if it exceeds the cost base of
your original unit or trust interest, although you'll be able to choose a CGT roll-over.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                66
An eligible demerger is one that happens on or after 1 July 2002 and satisfies certain tests.
The trust making the non-assessable payment will normally advise unit or trust interest
holders if this is the case.

For more information, see Investments in shares and units.

Cost base adjustments
Generally, you make any adjustment to the cost base and reduced cost base of your unit or
trust interest at the end of the income year. However, if some other CGT event happens to
the unit or trust interest during the year (for example, you sell your units), you must adjust
the cost base and reduced cost base just before the time of that CGT event. The amount of
the adjustment is based on the amount of non-assessable payments paid to you up to the
date of sale. You use the adjusted cost base and reduced cost base to work out your capital
gain or capital loss.

The cost base and reduced cost base adjustments are more complex if you deducted
capital losses from a grossed-up capital gain where a capital gain made by the trust was
reduced by the small business 50% active asset reduction. If this applies to you, you may
need to seek advice from us on how to make the adjustments.




   Example 20: receiving a non-assessable amount
   Bob owns units in OZ Investments Fund (a managed fund that isn't an AMIT and hasn't
   elected to apply the 2011 changes to the rules relating to capital gains made by trusts)
   which distributed income to him for the 2025–26 income year. The fund gave him a
   statement showing his distribution and that his share of the trust’s net capital gain
   included:
   •   $100 calculated using the discount method (grossed-up amount $200)
   •   $75 calculated using the indexation method
   •   $28 calculated using the 'other' method.

   These capital gains add up to $203.

   The statement shows Bob’s distribution didn't include a tax-free amount, but it did
   include a $105 tax-deferred amount.

   From his records, Bob knows that the cost base and reduced cost base of his units are
   $1,200 and $1,050 respectively.

   Bob has no other capital gains or capital losses for the 2025–26 income year and no
   unapplied net capital losses from earlier years.

   The following steps show how Bob works out the amounts to write on his tax return.

   Step 1
    As Bob has a share of a capital gain which the fund reduced using the CGT discount
   of 50% (so that his share was $100), he includes the grossed-up amount of his share
   ($200) in his total current year capital gains.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                  67
   Step 2
    Bob adds the grossed-up amount to his share of the trust’s capital gains calculated
   using the indexation method and 'other' method to work out his total current year
   capital gains:

      $200 + $75 + $28 = $303

   Step 3
    As Bob has no other capital gains or capital losses, and he must use the discount
   method for the capital gains calculated using the discount method from the trust, his
   net capital gain is equal to his share of the trust’s net capital gain for tax purposes
   ($203).


   Step 4
   Bob completes question 18 in his supplementary tax return as follows:




   Bob must print X in the No box at label M and leave the code blank because he didn't
   apply an exemption or roll-over.

   Records Bob needs to keep
    The tax-deferred amount Bob received isn't included in his income or his capital gains,
   but it affects the cost base and reduced cost base of his units in OZ Investments Fund
   for future income years.

   55. Cost base of $1,200.

   56. Subtract tax-deferred amount of $105.

   57. New cost base is $1,095.

   58. Reduced cost base is $1,050.

   59. Subtract tax-deferred amount of $105.

   60. The new reduced cost base is $945.




   Example 21: capital loss is greater than the non-discounted capital gain
   Ilena invested in XYZ Managed Fund (a managed fund that isn't an AMIT and hasn't
   elected to apply the 2011 changes to the rules relating to capital gains made by trusts).
   The fund made a distribution to Ilena for the year ending 30 June 2026 and gave her a




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                   68
   statement that shows her distribution meant that her share of the trust’s net capital
   gain included:
   •    $65 discounted capital gain
   •    $90 non-discounted capital gain.

   The statement shows Ilena’s distribution also included:
   •    $30 tax-deferred amount
   •    $35 tax-free amount.

   Ilena has no other capital gains but made a capital loss of $100 on some shares she
   sold during the year. Ilena has no unapplied net capital losses from earlier years.

   From her records, Ilena knows the cost base and reduced cost base of her units are
   $5,000 and $4,700 respectively.

   Ilena has to treat the capital gain component of her share of the fund’s net income for
   tax purposes as if she made the capital gain. To complete her tax return, Ilena must
   identify this capital gain component and work out her net capital gain.

   The following steps show how Ilena works out the amount to write at question 18 –
   label H in her supplementary tax return.

   Step 1
   As Ilena has a share of a capital gain which the fund reduced by the CGT discount of
   50% (her discounted share being $65), she must gross up her share of this capital
   gain. She does this by multiplying the amount of her share of the discounted capital
   gain by 2:

       $65 × 2 = $130

   Step 2
   Ilena adds her share of the trust’s grossed-up and non-discounted capital gains to
   work out her total current year capital gains:

       $130 + $90 = $220

   She writes her total current year capital gains ($220) at question 18 – label H in her
   supplementary tax return.

   Step 3
    After Ilena has grossed-up her share of the fund’s discounted capital gain, she
   subtracts her capital losses from her capital gains.

   Ilena can choose which capital gains she subtracts the capital losses from first. In her
   case, she gets the better result if she:
   •    subtracts as much as possible of her capital losses (which were $100) from her
        non-discounted capital gains ($90).
         $90 − $90 = $0 (non-discounted capital gains)
   •    subtracts her remaining capital losses after step 1 ($10) from her discounted
        capital gains ($130).
         $130 − $10 = $120 (discounted capital gains)




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                  69
   •    applies the CGT discount to her remaining discounted capital gains:
         ($120 × 50%) = $60 (discounted capital gains)

   Step 4
   Finally, Ilena adds up the capital gains remaining to arrive at her net capital gain:

       $0 (non-discounted) + $60 (discounted) = $60 net capital gain.

   Ilena completes question 18 in her supplementary tax return as follows:




   Ilena must print X in the No box at label M and leave the code blank. The trust applied
   the exemption or roll-over and will need to report that on its trust return.

   Records Ilena needs to keep

   The tax-deferred and tax-free amounts Ilena received aren't included in her income or
   her capital gain, but the tax-deferred amount affects the cost base and reduced cost
   base of her units in XYZ Managed Fund for future income years. The tax-free amount
   affects her reduced cost base.

   Ilena reduces the cost base and reduced cost base of her units as follows:
   •    cost base of $5,000
   •    subtract tax-deferred amount of $30
   •    new cost base is $4,970
   •    reduced cost base is $4,700
   •    subtract (tax-deferred amount + tax-free amount)
        $30 + $35 = $65
   •    the new reduced cost base is $4,635.


Cost base adjustments for AMIT members
If any non-assessable amounts from an AMIT are attributed to you, these may affect the
cost base of your units in the AMIT.

Non-assessable payments are any part of the profit of the trust that is non-assessable and
aren't included in your assessable income. Tax-free and tax-deferred amounts may reduce
the cost base of your units, while tax-exempt amounts don't affect the cost base; see Trust
non-assessable payments (CGT event E4).

Under the new tax system for managed investment trusts, the cost base of your units can
be adjusted both upwards and downwards (upwards adjustments weren't previously
allowed).


Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                 70
Your statement of distribution or advice or AMIT Member Annual statement (AMMA) should
show amounts and other information relevant to your cost base or reduced cost base.

The AMIT will calculate a cost base net amount. The cost base net amount is the balance of
your cost base reduction amount and your cost base increase amount.

   Example 21A: AMIT cost base net adjustment
   Miriam owns units in the Exponential Growth Fund, which is an AMIT.

   The fund attributes $13 per unit to Miriam for the income year but pays a cash amount
   of $3 per unit. The balance of $10 is retained by Exponential Growth Fund for
   reinvestment, rather than paid as a cash distribution. Miriam includes the
   $13 attributed amount in her assessable income as 'Share of net income from trusts' at
   question 13 Partnerships and trusts.

   Cost base consequences

   The $13 attributed to Miriam is added to her cost base of $55, while the actual
   payment of $3 is subtracted from her cost base. In this way, the cost base increase is
   netted off against the cost base reduction, resulting in a cost base net increase of
   $10 per unit. The cost base increase and cost base reduction are shown in Miriam's
   AMMA statement, along with a cost base net amount of $10.

   The $10 cost base net amount isn't included in Miriam's assessable income or capital
   gains, because it represents amounts that have already been taxed to her on
   attribution. However, it is used to increase the cost base of her units in the Exponential
   Growth Fund for future years.

   Miriam works it out as follows:
   •   cost base per unit is $55
   •   add taxable income attributed in the income year of $13
   •   subtract cash dividend for the income year of $3
   •   new cost base per unit is $65.

The amounts attributed to you to be included in your assessable income, as well as any non-
assessable non-exempt income related to your CGT asset, are added to the cost base
amount of your units in the AMIT. Cash payments you receive in relation to your units are
subtracted from their cost base. Any reductions and increases are netted off against each
other to arrive at your cost base net amount.

Any excess cost base net amount is used to reduce your unit’s cost base. If the excess is
greater than your cost base it will reduce your cost base to nil. Any remaining excess will
result in a capital gain. If the excess is less than your cost base your cost base amount will
be decreased, which may result in a greater capital gain or reduced capital loss on the
disposal of your membership interests in the AMIT.

Any shortfall in the cost base net amount is used to increase your asset’s cost base and
reduced cost base. This may result in a reduced capital gain or increased capital loss on
disposal of your assets.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                     71
For more information, see Law Companion Ruling LCR 2015/11 Attribution Managed
Investment Trusts: annual cost base adjustments for units in an AMIT and associated
transitional rules.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                          72
Investments in shares and units
Explains your CGT obligations if you sold or disposed of any shares or units in
a unit trust in the 2025–26 income year.

Managed fund
A managed fund is a unit trust. Where we refer to a unit trust in this guide, we are also
referring to a managed fund.

How capital gains tax affects shares and units
For CGT purposes, shares in a company or units in a unit trust are treated in the same way
as any other assets.

As a general rule, if you acquired any shares or units on or after 20 September 1985, you
may have to pay tax on any capital gain you make when a CGT event happens to them. This
would usually be when you sell or otherwise dispose of them. It also includes where you
redeem units in a managed fund by switching them from one fund to another. In these
cases, CGT event A1 happens. There is a list of all CGT events at Appendix 1.

Profits on the sale of shares held in carrying on a business of share trading are included as
ordinary income rather than as capital gains. In addition, if the TOFA rules apply to you and
you have elected to have certain tax-timing methods apply, gains and losses from trading of
shares and units will be brought to account under those rules rather than as capital gains or
capital losses.

Capital gains or losses made in respect of certain CGT events happening to shares held by
an Australian resident company, that represents a non-portfolio interest in foreign
companies may be reduced under Subdivision 768-G of the ITAA 1997 depending on the
active foreign business asset percentage of the foreign company, see Foreign income return
form guide.

A CGT event might happen to shares even if a change in their ownership is involuntary, for
example, if the company in which you hold shares is taken over or merges with another
company. This may result in a capital gain or capital loss.

This section also deals with the receipt of non-assessable payments from a company (CGT
event G1) while Trust distributions and your CGT position deals with non-assessable
payments from a trust (CGT event E4 or E10).

If you own shares in a company that has been placed in liquidation or administration, CGT
event G3 lets you choose to make a capital loss when the liquidator or administrator
declares the shares (or other financial instruments) worthless.

There are a number of special CGT rules if you receive such things as bonus shares, bonus
units, rights, options or non-assessable payments from a company or trust. Special rules
also apply if you buy convertible notes or participate in an employee share scheme or a
dividend reinvestment plan.

The rest of this section explains these rules and has examples showing how they work in
practice. The flowcharts at Appendix 3 will also help you work out whether the special rules
apply to you.

Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                 73
For more information, see:
•    Share investing versus share trading
•    You and your shares 2026

Identifying shares or units sold
Sometimes taxpayers own shares or units that they may have acquired at different times.
This can happen as people decide to increase their investment in a particular company or
unit trust. A common question people ask when they dispose of only part of their investment
is how to identify the particular shares or units they have disposed of.

This can be very important because shares or units bought at different times may have
different amounts included in their cost base. In calculating the capital gain or capital loss
when disposing of only part of an investment, you need to be able to identify which shares
or units you have disposed of. Also, when you dispose of any shares or units you acquired
before 20 September 1985, any capital gain or capital loss you make is generally
disregarded.

If you have the relevant records (for example, share certificates), you may be able to
identify which particular shares or units you have disposed of. In other cases, the
Commissioner will accept your selection of the identity of shares disposed of.

Alternatively, you may wish to use a ‘first in, first out’ basis where you treat the first shares
or units you bought as being the first you disposed of.

In limited circumstances, we'll also accept an average cost method to determine the cost of
the shares disposed of. You can only use this average cost method when all of the following
apply:
•    the shares are in the same company
•    the shares are acquired on the same day
•    the shares have identical rights and obligations
•    you're not required to use market value for cost base purposes.

    Example 22: identifying when shares or units were acquired
    Boris bought 1,000 shares in WOA Ltd on 1 July 1999. He bought another 3,000 shares
    in the company on 1 July 2004.

    In December 2004, WOA Ltd issued Boris with a CHESS statement for his 4,000
    shares. When he sold 1,500 of the shares on 1 January, he wasn't sure whether they
    were the shares he bought in 2003 or whether they included the shares bought in
    1999.

    Because Boris couldn't identify when he bought the particular shares he sold, he
    decided to use the ‘first in, first out’ method and nominated the 1,000 shares bought in
    1999 plus 500 of the shares bought in 2004.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                        74
Demutualisation of life insurance and general insurance companies
If you hold a policy in a life insurance company or a general insurance company that
demutualises, you may be subject to CGT. This may be either at the time of the
demutualisation or when you sell your shares (or another CGT event happens).

A company demutualises when it changes its membership interests to shares, for example,
AMP, IOOF and NRMA. (There are similar rules for non-insurance organisations that
demutualise).

The insurance company may give you the choice to either keep your share entitlement or to
take cash by selling the shares under contract through an entity set up by the company
(‘share sale facility’).

If it is an Australian insurance company and you chose to keep the shares, you'll not be
subject to CGT until you eventually sell them or another CGT event happens. However, if
you elect to sell your share entitlement through a share sale facility and take cash, you need
to include any capital gain in your tax return in the income year in which you entered into the
contract to sell the shares, even though you may not receive the cash until a later income
year.

The demutualising company will write to all potential ‘shareholders' and advise them of the
acquisition cost in each instance, sometimes referred to as the ‘embedded value'. Even
though you didn't pay anything to acquire the shares, they have a value that is used as the
cost base and reduced cost base for CGT purposes.

If you sell your shares before the insurance company is listed on the stock exchange and
you make a capital loss, you disregard the loss.

If you hold a policy in an overseas insurance company that demutualises, you may be
subject to CGT at the time of the demutualisation. Contact us for advice if this applies to
you.

Demutualisation of private health insurers
If you hold or held a policy of a private health insurer that converts from a not-for-profit
insurer to a profit insurer by demutualising, you disregard capital gains and capital losses
you make from a CGT event happening to your interest or other right you have or had in the
insurer.

If you receive shares or rights to acquire shares as a result of the demutualisation of your
private health insurer you'll be taken for CGT purposes to have acquired each share or right
at the time it is issued. The first element of the cost base or reduced cost base is equal to
the market value of that share or right on the day they're issued.

Any sale of the shares or rights will be a CGT event that may give rise to a capital gain or
capital loss in the income year in which you enter into the contract of sale. This includes
when the shares are sold through the sale facility.

If you receive a cash payment under the demutualisation that isn't as a result of the sale of
the shares or rights you'll not make a capital gain or loss.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                    75
Demutualisation of friendly societies
If you hold or held a policy of a friendly society that demutualised from a not-for-profit
friendly society to a profit friendly society, you may be able to disregard your capital gain or
loss from the CGT event. You can disregard capital gains and capital losses you make from
a CGT event happening to your interest or other right you have or had in the friendly society
except where you receive an amount of money. Your friendly society should advise you
whether you realised a capital gain or capital loss.

If you received only shares, or rights to acquire shares, as a result of the demutualisation of
your friendly society, we consider for CGT purposes that you acquired each share or right at
the time it was issued.

Your friendly society should advise you of the cost base of the shares or rights to acquire
shares. The cost base, or reduced cost base, will be a proportion of the total of both the:
•    market value of the health insurance business
•    embedded value of the life insurance business and any other business of the friendly
     society.

Selling the shares or rights (through the sale facility or otherwise) will be a CGT event that
may give rise to a capital gain or capital loss in the income year in which you enter into the
contract of sale.

Share buy-backs
As a shareholder, you may have received an offer from a company to buy back some or all
of your shares in the company. If you disposed of shares back to the company under a
share buy-back arrangement, you may have made a capital gain or capital loss from that
CGT event.

You compare the capital proceeds with your cost base and reduced cost base to work out
whether you have made a capital gain or capital loss.

The time you make the capital gain or capital loss will depend on the conditions of the
particular buy-back offer. It may be the time you lodge your application to participate in the
buy-back or, if it is a conditional offer of buy-back, the time you accept the offer.

For an off-market share buy-back undertaken by a listed public company, no part of the
buy-back price is a dividend. Instead, the entire buy-back price is treated as capital
proceeds. For more information, see Capital proceeds from an off-market share buy-back.

Under other off-market buy-backs, where a dividend is paid as part of the buy-back price,
the amount paid excluding the dividend is generally your capital proceeds for the share.


    Example 23: buy-back
    Sam bought 4,500 shares in Company A in January 1994 at a cost of $5 per share. In
    February 2026, Sam applied to participate in a buy-back offer to dispose of 675 shares
    (15%). Company A approved a buy-back of 10% (450) of the shares on 15 June 2026.
    The company sent Sam a cheque on 5 July 2026 for $4,050 (450 shares × $9). No
    part of the payment is a dividend.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                     76
   When Sam works out his capital gain for 2025–26, if he chooses:
   •    Indexation method, he works out his capital gain as
        –   capital proceeds of $4,050
        –   cost base 450 shares × $5
             $2,250 × 1.117 including indexation = $2,513
        –   capital gain is $1,537.
   •    Discount method, he works out his capital gain as
        –   capital proceeds of $4,050
        –   cost base of $2,250
        –   capital gain (before applying any discount) is $1,800.

   Sam has no capital losses to apply against this capital gain and decides that the
   discount method will provide him with the better result. He takes $900 ($1,800 × 50%)
   into account in working out his net capital gain for the year.




   Example 24: off-market buy-back of shares held in a private company
   including dividend
   Ranjini bought 10,000 shares in Company M, a private company, in January 2004 at a
   cost of $6 per share, including brokerage. The shares in Company M aren't listed on a
   stock exchange.

   In January 2026, the company wrote to its shareholders advising them it was offering
   to buy back 10% of their shares for $9.60 each. The buy-back price was to include a
   franked dividend of $1.40 per share (and each dividend was to carry a franking credit
   of $0.60).

   Ranjini applied to participate in the buy-back to sell 1,000 of her shares.

   Company M approved the buy-back on 1 May 2026 on the terms anticipated in its
   earlier letter to shareholders.

   The market value of Company M shares at the time of the buy-back (if the buy-back
   didn't occur and was never proposed) was $10.20.

   Ranjini received a cheque for $9,600 (1,000 shares × $9.60) on 8 June 2026.

   Because it was an off-market share buy-back, the shares weren't held in a listed public
   company, and the buy-back price was less than what the market value of the share
   would have been if the buy-back hadn’t occurred. Ranjini works out her capital gain for
   the 2025–26 year as follows.

   Capital proceeds:

       Market value ($10.20) less dividend ($1.40) = $8.80
       $8.80 × 1,000 shares = $8,800
       Cost base: $6 × 1,000 shares = $6,000
       Capital gain (before applying any discount) = $2,800




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                 77
    Ranjini takes her capital gain into account when completing question 18 in her
    supplementary tax return. She also includes her dividend at question 11 in her tax
    return ($1,400 at label T and $600 at label U).


Shares in a company in liquidation or administration
If a company is placed in liquidation or administration, company law restricts the transfer of
shares in the company. This means that, in the absence of special CGT rules, you may not
be able to realise a capital loss on shares that have become worthless unless you declare a
trust over them.

In certain circumstances, you can choose to realise a capital loss on worthless shares before
dissolution (if you acquired the shares on or after 20 September 1985). This applies if you
own shares in a company and a liquidator or administrator declares in writing that there is no
likelihood you'll receive any further distribution in the course of winding up the company. A
liquidator’s declaration can be made after you receive a distribution during the winding up.

Financial instruments relating to a company (not just shares) can also be declared worthless
by a liquidator or administrator.

Financial instruments include (but aren't limited to):
•    convertible notes
•    debentures, bonds or promissory notes issued by the company
•    loans to the company
•    futures contracts, forward contracts or currency swap contracts relating to the
     company
•    rights or options to acquire shares in a company and any of the financial instruments in
     the list above.

Many financial instruments may be referred to as securities.

If you make this choice, you'll make a capital loss equal to the reduced cost base of the
shares (or financial instruments) at the time of the liquidator’s or administrator’s declaration.
The cost base and reduced cost base of the shares (or financial instruments) are reduced to
nil just after the liquidator or administrator makes the declaration. This cost base or reduced
cost base will be used for the purposes of working out any capital gain or loss you may
make from a future CGT event in relation to those shares (or financial instruments).

These rules don't apply to:
•    shares or financial instruments you acquired before 20 September 1985
•    a financial instrument where any profit made on the disposal or redemption of it would
     be included in your assessable income or any loss would be deductible, such as a
     traditional security or qualifying security
•    shares that are revenue assets at the time when the declaration is made
•    a right acquired prior to 1 July 2009 under an employee share scheme
•    an employee share scheme interest or an employee share scheme interest that is a
     beneficial interest in a right that is forfeited and is taken to have been acquired



Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                   78
•    units in unit trusts or financial instruments relating to trusts.

For more information, see:
•    Investments in a company in liquidation or administration
•    Employee share schemes

    Example 25: liquidator's declaration that shares are worthless
    The administrators of XYZ Company Ltd made a written declaration on 31 March 2026
    that they had reasonable grounds to believe that there was no likelihood that the
    shareholders of XYZ Company Ltd would receive any distribution from their shares.

    Hillary purchased shares in XYZ Company Ltd in March 2010 for $1.70, including
    brokerage. Following the administrators’ declaration, Hillary can choose to make
    capital losses equal to the reduced cost bases of her shares as at 31 March 2026. She
    claims the capital losses in her 2026 tax return.


If no declaration is made by a liquidator or administrator, or you haven't chosen to make a
capital loss following a declaration by a liquidator or administrator, you may make a capital
loss on your shares or financial instruments when a court order is given to dissolve the
company.

For information on when and how you make a choice, see Choices.

Also, if a company is wound up voluntarily, shareholders may realise a capital loss either
3 months after a liquidator lodges a tax return showing that the final meeting of the
company has been held, or on another date declared by a court. The cancellation of shares
as a result of the dissolution of the company is an example of CGT event C2, see
Appendix 1.

Takeovers and mergers
If a company in which you own shares is taken over or merges with another company, you
may have a CGT obligation if you're required to dispose of your existing shares or they're
cancelled.

In certain circumstances, if you acquire new shares in the takeover or merged company, you
may be able to defer paying CGT until a later CGT event happens.

Some takeover or merger arrangements involve an exchange of shares. In these cases,
when you calculate your capital gain or capital loss, your capital proceeds will be the market
value of the shares received in the takeover or merged company at the time of disposal of
your original shares.

If you receive a combination of money and shares in the takeover or merged company, your
capital proceeds are the total of the money and the market value of the shares you received
at the time of disposal of the original shares.

The cost of acquiring the shares in the takeover or merged company is the market value of
your original shares at the time you acquire the other shares, reduced by any cash
proceeds.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                    79
To correctly calculate the capital gain or capital loss for your original shares, you'll need to
keep records (in addition to the usual records) showing the parties to the arrangement, the
conditions of the arrangement and the capital proceeds.

As each takeover or merger arrangement will vary according to its own particular
circumstances, you need to get full details of the arrangement from the parties involved.

We're assuming in the following example that the scrip for scrip roll-over doesn't apply.


    Example 26: takeover
    In October 2002, Desiree bought 500 shares in DEF Ltd. These shares are currently
    worth $2 each. Their cost base is $1.50.

    XYZ Ltd offers to acquire each share in DEF Ltd for one share in XYZ Ltd and 75 cents
    cash. The shares in XYZ Ltd are valued at $1.25 each. Accepting the offer, Desiree
    receives 500 shares in XYZ Ltd and $375 cash.

    The capital proceeds received for each share in DEF Ltd is $2 ($1.25 market value of
    each XYZ Ltd share plus 75 cents cash). Therefore, as the cost base of each DEF Ltd
    share is $1.50, Desiree will make a capital gain of 50 cents ($2 − $1.50) on each share,
    a total of $250.

    The cost base of the newly acquired XYZ Ltd shares is the market value of the shares
    in DEF Ltd ($2) less the cash amount received ($0.75) which equals $1.25 each or a
    total of $625 (500 × $1.25).


Scrip for scrip roll-over
If a company in which you owned shares was taken over and you received new shares in the
takeover company, you may be entitled to a scrip for scrip roll-over. You may also be
eligible for this roll-over if you exchange a unit or other interest in a fixed trust, for a similar
interest in another fixed trust.

A scrip for scrip roll-over isn't available if a share is exchanged for a unit or other interest in
a fixed trust, or if a unit or other interest in a fixed trust is exchanged for a share.

You can only choose the roll-over if you have made a capital gain from such an exchange on
or after 10 December 1999. A roll-over doesn't apply to a capital loss.

A roll-over is only available if the exchange is in consequence of an arrangement that results
in the acquiring entity (or the wholly owned group of which it is a member) becoming the
owner of 80% or more of the original company or trust.

For companies, the arrangement may qualify for the scrip for scrip roll-over if one of the
following applies:
•    holders of voting interests in the target entity can participate in the merger or takeover
     on substantially the same terms
•    it includes a takeover bid that doesn't contravene key provisions in Chapter 6 of the
     Corporations Act 2001 (Corporations Act)
•    if the target entity is a company, it includes a scheme of arrangement approved by a
     court under Part 5.1 of the Corporations Act.


Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                      80
For trusts, an arrangement may qualify if either:
•       all owners of trust voting interests in the original entity or, where there are no voting
        interests, all owners of units or other fixed interests can participate
•       it includes a takeover bid that doesn't contravene the Corporations Act.

There are special rules if a company or trust has a small number of shareholders or
beneficiaries and there is a significant or common stakeholder. If the company or trust
doesn't let you know, you'll need to seek information from them about whether these
conditions have been satisfied.

The roll-over allows you to disregard the capital gain made from the original shares, units or
other interest. You're taken to have acquired the replacement shares, units or other interest
for the cost base of the original interest.

You can apply the CGT discount when you dispose of new shares providing the combined
period that you owned the original shares and the new shares is at least 12 months. The
same applies to units in a trust. Note that you have to deduct any capital losses (including
unapplied net capital losses from earlier years) from your capital gains before applying the
CGT discount.

You may only be eligible for a partial roll-over if you exchange shares, units or interests for
similar interests in another entity (replacement interest) plus something else, usually cash.

This is because the roll-over applies only to the replacement interest. You'll need to
apportion the cost base of the original interest between the replacement interest and the
cash (or other proceeds not eligible for the roll-over).

If your original shares, units or other interests were acquired before 20 September 1985
(pre-CGT), you're not eligible for a scrip for scrip roll-over. Instead, you acquire the
replacement interest at the time of the exchange and the replacement interest is no longer a
pre-CGT asset. However, if the arrangement is one that would otherwise qualify for a scrip
for scrip roll-over, the cost base of the replacement interest is its market value just after the
acquisition.


    Example 27: partial scrip for scrip roll-over
    Gunther owns 100 shares in Windsor Ltd, each with a cost base of $9. He accepts a
    takeover offer from Regal Ltd, which provides for Gunther to receive one Regal share
    plus $10 cash for each share in Windsor. Gunther receives 100 shares in Regal and
    $1,000 cash. Just after Gunther is issued shares in Regal, each share is worth $20.

    Gunther receives $10 cash for each of his Windsor shares and so has $1,000 to which
    a roll-over doesn't apply.

    In this case, it is reasonable to allocate a portion of the cost base of the original shares
    having regard to the proportion that the cash bears to the total proceeds. That is:

         A÷B×C=D

    Where:
    •     A is cash
    •     B is total proceeds (cash and value of shares received)


Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                        81
   •    C is cost base of original share
   •    D is proportion of cost base for which cash was received.

   Following on from the formula above, Gunther's calculations are:

       $1,000 ÷ $3,000 × $900 = $300

   Gunther’s capital gain is as follows:

       $1,000 (cash) − $300 (cost base) = $700 (capital gain)

   Gunther calculates the cost base of each of his Regal shares as follows:

       ($900 − $300) ÷ 100 = $6




   Example 28: scrip for scrip roll-over
   Stephanie owns ordinary shares in Reef Ltd. On 28 February, she accepted a takeover
   offer from Starfish Ltd, under which she received one ordinary share, and one
   preference share for each Reef share. The market value of the Starfish shares just
   after Stephanie acquired them was $20 for each ordinary share and $10 for each
   preference share.

   The cost base of each Reef share just before Stephanie ceased to own them was $15.

   The offer made by Starfish Ltd satisfied all the requirements for a scrip for scrip roll-
   over.

   If the roll-over didn't apply, Stephanie would have made a capital gain per share of:

       $30 (capital proceeds) − $15 (cost base) = $15 (capital gain)

   Scrip for scrip roll-over allows Stephanie to disregard the capital gain. The cost base of
   the Starfish shares is the cost base of the Reef Ltd shares.

   Apportioning the cost base

   As the exchange is one share in Reef Ltd for 2 shares in Starfish Ltd, Stephanie needs
   to apportion the cost base of the Reef Ltd share between the ordinary share and the
   preference share.

   Cost base of ordinary share:

       $20 ÷ 30 × $15 = $10

   Cost base of preference share:

       $10 ÷ 30 × $15 = $5


Demergers
A demerger involves the restructuring of a corporate or fixed trust group by splitting its
operations into 2 or more entities or groups.



Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                    82
Under a demerger, the owners of the head entity of the group (that is, the shareholders of
the company or unit holders of the trust) acquire a direct interest (shares or units) in an
entity that was formerly part of the group (the demerged entity).


    Example 29: demerger
    Peter owns shares (his original interest) in Company A. Company B is a wholly owned
    subsidiary of Company A. Company A undertakes a demerger by transferring all its
    shares in Company B to its shareholders. Following the demerger, all the shareholders
    in Company A, including Peter, will own all the shares in Company B (their new
    interests) in the same proportion that they hold their shares in Company A.


Demergers on or after 1 July 2002
Certain rules apply to eligible demergers that happened on or after 1 July 2002.

Demerger roll-over
If you received new interests in a demerged entity under an eligible demerger that
happened on or after 1 July 2002, you need to be aware of the following CGT
consequences:
•    you may be entitled to choose a roll-over for any capital gain or capital loss you make
     under the demerger
•    you must calculate the cost base and reduced cost base of your interests in the head
     entity and your new interests in the demerged entity immediately after the demerger.

The head entity will normally advise you whether it has undertaken an eligible demerger. We
may have provided advice to the head entity in the form of a class ruling.

Roll-over available
To choose a roll-over, the demerger must be an eligible demerger.

If you choose a roll-over both of the following apply:
•    you disregard any capital gain or capital loss made under the demerger
•    your new interests in the demerged entity are acquired on the date of the demerger.
     However, if a proportion of your original interests was acquired before 20 September
     1985 (pre-CGT), the same proportion of your new interests in the demerged entity is
     treated as pre-CGT assets.

If you don't choose a roll-over both of the following apply:
•    you can't disregard any capital gain or capital loss made under the demerger
•    all your new interests in the demerged entity are acquired on the date of the demerger.

Demerger exemption
This exemption applies to disregard certain capital gains or capital losses made by a
demerging entity in a demerger group. A demerger group comprises the head entity of a
group of companies or trusts and at least one demerger subsidiary. Discretionary trusts and
super funds can't be members of a demerger group.


Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                   83
Cost base calculations
You must recalculate the first element of the cost base and reduced cost base of your
remaining original interests in the head entity and of your new interests in the demerged
entity. You must make these calculations whether you choose a roll-over or not, or if no CGT
event happens to your original interests under the demerger.

The calculation will depend on whether you have pre-CGT original interests in the head
entity.

Cost base calculations where you don't have pre-CGT interests
You work out the cost base and reduced cost base of your remaining post-CGT original
interests and your post-CGT new interests immediately after the demerger. You do this by
spreading the total cost base of your post-CGT original interests (immediately before the
demerger) over both your remaining post-CGT original interests and your post-CGT new
interests. The following steps explain how to do this.

The steps and example 30 work out new cost bases using a method referred to as the
‘relative market value method’, which is sometimes also referred to as the ‘averaging
method’. You may be able to use other methods if they're reasonable.

For more information, see Demergers CGT roll-over for shareholders and unit holders.

Step 1
Add the cost bases of your post-CGT original interests immediately before the demerger.
Don't reduce your total cost base by any capital amounts returned to you under the
demerger and don't include indexation.

Step 2
Use the relevant percentages to apportion the step 1 amount between both your post-CGT:
•    original interests in the head entity
•    new interests in the demerged entity.

The head entity should generally advise you of the relevant percentages to use.

Step 3
Divide the cost base apportioned to the head entity interests (from step 2) by the number of
remaining post-CGT original interests you own.

Step 4
Divide the cost base apportioned to the demerged entity interests (from step 2) by the
number of post-CGT new interests you own.

These amounts will form the first element of the cost base and reduced cost base of your
post-CGT original interests and post-CGT new interests.

    Example 30: no pre-CGT interests




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                               84
   Under the BHP Billiton Ltd demerger of BHP Steel Ltd, shareholders received one BHP
   Steel share for every 5 BHP Billiton shares they owned at the date of the demerger.

   Anita owned 280 BHP Billiton shares (all post-CGT) with a cost base of $2,500
   immediately before the demerger. Under the demerger, Anita received 56 BHP Steel
   shares. Anita works out the cost base and reduced cost base of her BHP Billiton shares
   and BHP Steel shares as follows:

   61. BHP Billiton advised shareholders to apportion 94.937% of the total cost base from
       step 1 to BHP Billiton shares and 5.063% to BHP Steel shares
       a.   BHP Billiton: 94.937% × $2,500 = $2,373.43
       b.   BHP Steel: 5.063% × $2,500 = $126.58.

   62. Divide the step 1(a) amount by the 280 BHP Billiton shares
       $2,373.43 ÷ 280 = $8.48 per share

   63. Divide the step 1(b) amount by the 56 BHP Steel shares
       $126.58 ÷ 56 = $2.26 per share.


Cost base calculations where you have pre-CGT interests
Working out the cost base where you have pre-CGT interests and you choose, can't choose
or don't choose a roll-over.

If you choose a roll-over
If you choose a roll-over and a proportion of your original interests are pre-CGT, the same
proportion of your new interests will be treated as pre-CGT interests. It isn't necessary to
calculate the cost base and reduced cost base for your pre-CGT interests.

You calculate the cost base and reduced cost base of your remaining post-CGT original
interests and your post-CGT new interests in the same way as shown in the example above.

There is no change to the acquisition date of your original interests.

If you don't or can't choose a roll-over
If you don't or you can't choose a roll-over (for example, because a CGT event didn't happen
to your original interests), the new interests that you receive for your pre-CGT original
interests are treated as post-CGT interests. You work out the cost base of these new
interests under the ordinary cost base rules. This will generally be equal to the capital return
and dividend distributed from the head entity that is applied to acquire those new interests.

It may be to your advantage not to choose a roll-over for the new interests you receive for
your pre-CGT original interests. For example, where the reduced cost bases of those new
interests calculated under the ordinary cost base rules mean you'll make a capital loss when
you dispose of them.

You calculate the cost base and reduced cost base of your remaining post-CGT original
interests and your post-CGT new interests (other than those received for pre-CGT original
interests) in the same way as shown in Example 30, except that you ignore the new
interests received for pre-CGT original interests in the calculation.



Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                   85
There is no change to the acquisition date of your original interests.

    Example 31: with pre-CGT interests
    Anita owned 400 BHP Billiton shares immediately before the demerger:
    •     120 pre-CGT shares
    •     280 post-CGT shares (the cost base of which, immediately before the demerger,
          was $2,500).

    Either
     Anita chooses a roll-over. The 24 BHP Steel shares she received for the 120 pre-CGT
    BHP Billiton shares are pre-CGT. It isn't necessary for Anita to work out the cost base
    and reduced cost base for her pre-CGT interests.

    Immediately after the demerger, she calculates the cost base and reduced cost base
    of her 280 post-CGT BHP Billiton shares and the 56 BHP Steel shares she received for
    those BHP Billiton shares in the same way as shown in Example 30.

    Or
     Anita doesn't choose a roll-over. The 24 BHP Steel shares she received for the 120
    pre-CGT BHP shares are post-CGT shares acquired on the date of the demerger.
    Immediately after the demerger, the cost base and reduced cost base of the 24 BHP
    Steel shares are $3.45 per share (the capital return of $0.69 per share × 5).

    Immediately after the demerger, she calculates the cost base and reduced cost base
    of her 280 post-CGT BHP Billiton shares and the 56 BHP Steel shares she received for
    those BHP Billiton shares in the same way as shown in Example 30.

    In either case there is no change to the pre-CGT status of Anita’s 120 BHP Billiton
    shares.


Using the discount method if you sell your shares after the demerger
If you sell your new interests in the demerged entity after the demerger, you must have
owned those interests for at least 12 months from the date you acquired the corresponding
original interests in the head entity in order to use the discount method.

    Example 32: using the discount method after a demerger (1)
    You received BHP Steel Ltd shares under the demerger on 22 July 2002. They related
    to shares you acquired in BHP Billiton Ltd on 15 August 2001. You can only use the
    discount method to work out your capital gain on these shares if you dispose of them
    after 15 August 2002; that is, more than 12 months after the date you acquired the
    BHP Billiton shares.


However, you calculate the 12 months from the date of demerger if you either:
•       didn't choose the roll-over and you received new interests in the demerged entity which
        relate to pre-CGT interests in the head entity
•       acquired your new interests without a CGT event happening to your original interests.



Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                    86
   Example 33: using the discount method after a demerger (2)
   You received BHP Steel Ltd shares under the demerger where you calculated the cost
   base as $3.45 per share (because they related to pre-CGT shares you owned in BHP
   Billiton Ltd and you didn't choose a roll-over). You can only use the discount method to
   work out your capital gain on these shares if you disposed of them after 22 July 2003;
   that is, more than 12 months after the demerger.


Demergers calculator and other products and information
You can use our Demergers calculator to help you make these calculations.

We also have other products to help you, such as question-and-answer sheets for some
demergers undertaken by major listed entities, see Demergers CGT roll-over for
shareholders and unit holders.

Dividend reinvestment plans
Some companies ask their shareholders whether they would like to participate in a dividend
reinvestment plan. Under these plans, shareholders can choose to use their dividend to
acquire additional shares in the company instead of receiving a cash payment. These shares
are usually issued at a discount on the current market price of the shares in the company.

For CGT purposes, if you participate in a dividend reinvestment plan you're treated as if you
had received a cash dividend and then used the cash to buy additional shares.

Each share (or parcel of shares) acquired in this way, on or after 20 September 1985, is
subject to CGT. The cost base of the new shares includes the price you paid to acquire
them, that is, the amount of the dividend.


   Example 34: dividend reinvestment plans
   Natalie owns 1,440 shares in PHB Ltd. The shares are currently worth $8 each. In
   November 2025, the company declared a dividend of 25 cents per share.

   Natalie could either take the $360 dividend as cash (1,440 × 25 cents) or receive
   45 additional shares in the company (360 ÷ 8).

   Natalie decided to participate in the dividend reinvestment plan and received 45 new
   shares on 20 December 2025. She included the $360 dividend in her 2025–26
   assessable income.

   For CGT purposes, she acquired the 45 new shares for $360 on 20 December 2025.


Bonus shares
Bonus shares are additional shares a shareholder receives for an existing holding of shares
in a company. If you dispose of bonus shares received on or after 20 September 1985, you
may make a capital gain. You may also have to modify the cost base and reduced cost base
of your existing shares in the company if you receive bonus shares.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                  87
The cost base and reduced cost base of bonus shares depend on whether the bonus shares
are assessable as a dividend.

As a result of changes to company and taxation laws, the paid-up value of bonus shares is
now generally not assessable as a dividend. An exception to this rule is where you have the
choice of being paid a cash dividend or of being issued shares under a dividend
reinvestment plan. These shares are treated as dividends and the amount of the dividend is
included in your assessable income.


Table 3 explains how the time of issue of your bonus shares affects whether the
paid-up value of the bonus shares is assessed as a dividend.

    Date                          Implications of timing of bonus shares

    From 20 September 1985        Many bonus shares issued were paid out of a company’s asset
    to 30 June 1987 inclusive     revaluation reserve or from a share premium account. These bonus
                                  shares aren't usually assessable dividends.

    From 1 July 1987 to           The paid-up value of bonus shares issued is assessed as a dividend
    30 June 1998 inclusive        unless paid from a share premium account.

    From 1 July 1998              The paid-up value of bonus shares issued is generally not assessed as
                                  a dividend unless you have the choice of being paid a dividend or
                                  being issued shares and you chose to be issued with shares.

There are other, less common, circumstances where bonus shares will be assessed as a
dividend, for example, where:
•      the bonus shares are being substituted for a dividend to give a tax advantage
•      the company directs bonus shares to some shareholders and dividends to others to give
       them a tax benefit.

Flowchart 3.1 in Appendix 3 summarises the different rules applying to different bonus
shares issued on or after 20 September 1985.

Bonus shares issued where no amount is assessed as a dividend
This will depend on when the shares were acquired.

Original shares acquired on or after 20 September 1985
If your bonus shares relate to other shares that you acquired on or after 20 September 1985
(referred to as your original shares) your bonus shares are taken to have been acquired on
the date you acquired your original shares. If you acquired your original shares at different
times, you'll have to work out how many of your bonus shares are taken to have been
acquired at each of those times.

Calculate the cost base and reduced cost base of the bonus shares by apportioning the cost
base and reduced cost base of the original shares over both the original and the bonus
shares. Effectively, this results in a reduction of the cost base and reduced cost base of the
original shares. You also include any calls paid on partly paid bonus shares as part of the
cost base and reduced cost base that is apportioned between the original and the bonus
shares.

Australian Taxation Office      Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                        88
Original shares acquired before 20 September 1985
Your CGT obligations depend on when the bonus shares were issued and whether they are
fully paid or partly paid.

For more information, see Flowchart 3.1 in Appendix 3.

   Example 35: fully paid bonus shares
   Chris bought 100 shares in MAC Ltd for $1 each on 1 June 1985. He bought 300 more
   shares for $1 each on 27 May 1986. On 15 November 1986, MAC Ltd issued Chris with
   400 bonus shares from its capital profits reserve, fully paid to $1. Chris didn't pay
   anything to acquire the bonus shares and no part of the value of the bonus shares was
   assessed as a dividend.

   For CGT purposes, the acquisition date of 100 of the bonus shares is 1 June 1985 (pre-
   CGT). Therefore, those bonus shares aren't subject to CGT.

   The acquisition date of the other 300 bonus shares is 27 May 1986. Their cost base is
   worked out by spreading the cost of the 300 shares Chris bought on that date over
   both those original shares and the remaining 300 bonus shares. As the 300 original
   shares cost $300, the cost base of each share will now be 50 cents.




   Example 36: partly paid bonus shares
   Klaus owns 200 shares in MAC Ltd, which he bought on 31 October 1984, and 200
   shares in PUP Ltd, which he bought on 31 January 1985.

   On 1 January 1987, both MAC Ltd and PUP Ltd made their shareholders a one-for-one
   bonus share offer of $1 shares partly paid to 50 cents. Klaus elected to accept the
   offer and acquired 200 new partly paid shares in each company. No part of the value
   of the bonus shares was taxed as a dividend.

   On 1 April 1989, PUP Ltd made a call for the balance of 50 cents outstanding on the
   partly paid shares, payable on 30 June 1989. Klaus paid the call payment on that date.
   MAC Ltd hasn't yet made any calls on its partly paid shares.

   For CGT purposes, Klaus is treated as having acquired his bonus PUP Ltd shares on
   the date he became liable to pay the call (1 April 1989). The cost base of the bonus
   shares in PUP Ltd includes the amount of the call payment (50 cents) plus the market
   value of the shares immediately before the call was made.

   The MAC Ltd bonus shares will continue to have the same acquisition date as the
   original shares (31 October 1984) and are therefore not subject to CGT. However, this
   won't be the case if Klaus makes any more payments to the company on calls made by
   the company for any part of the unpaid amount on the bonus shares. In this case, the
   acquisition date of the bonus shares will be when the liability to pay the call arises and
   the bonus shares will then be subject to CGT.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                    89
Bonus shares issued where the paid-up value is assessed as a dividend
If the paid-up value of bonus shares is assessed as a dividend, you may have to pay CGT
when you dispose of the bonus shares, regardless of when you acquired the original shares.

Original shares acquired on or after 20 September 1985
If your bonus shares relate to original shares that you acquired on or after 20 September
1985, the acquisition date of the bonus shares is the date they were issued. Their cost base
and reduced cost base includes the amount of the dividend, plus any call payments you
made to the company if they were only partly paid.

Exception – bonus shares received before 1 July 1987
The exception to this rule is bonus shares you received before 1 July 1987. They are taken
to be acquired on the date you acquired your original shares. Their cost base is calculated
as if the amount wasn't taxed as a dividend.

For more information, see Bonus shares issued where no amount is assessed as a dividend.

Original shares acquired before 20 September 1985
The rules that apply where you acquired your original shares before 20 September 1985
depend on when the bonus shares were issued and whether they were partly paid or fully
paid.

For more information, see Flowchart 3.1 in Appendix 3.

   Example 37: cost base of bonus shares
   Mark owns 1,000 shares in RIM Ltd, which he bought on 30 September 1984 for $1
   each.

   On 1 February 1997, the company issued him with 500 bonus shares partly paid to
   50 cents. The paid-up value of bonus shares ($250) is an assessable dividend to Mark.

   On 1 May 1997, the company made a call for the 50 cents outstanding on each bonus
   share, which Mark paid on 1 July 1997.

   The total cost base of the bonus shares is $500, consisting of the $250 dividend
   received on the issue of the bonus shares on 1 February 1997 plus the $250 call
   payment made on 1 July 1997.

   The bonus shares were acquired on 1 February 1997.

   If Mark held the bonus shares for more than 12 months when he sold them, he can use
   the indexation method to calculate his capital gain.

   Amounts payable to a company on shares in the company can be indexed only from
   the date of actual payment. In Mark’s case, he can only index the $250 call payment
   from the date he paid it (1 July 1997).

   However, indexation on the $250 dividend included in his assessable income on the
   issue of the bonus shares was available from 1 February 1997. This is different from
   the indexation treatment of amounts paid to acquire assets in other circumstances



Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                  90
   where indexation is available from the time the liability to make the payment arises.
   The indexation rules are explained in more detail in How to work out your capital gain
   or capital loss.

   If Mark disposes of the shares after 11:45 am AEST on 21 September 1999, he can
   calculate his capital gain using either the indexation method or the discount method.


Bonus units
If you have received bonus units on or after 20 September 1985, you may make a capital
gain when you dispose of them.

The CGT rules for bonus units are similar to those for bonus shares. However, the rules
don't apply if the bonus units are issued by a corporate unit trust or a public trading trust.

When the unit trust issues the bonus units, they will generally tell you what amount (if any)
you have to include in your assessable income. You need to keep a record of that
information to work out your CGT obligation when you dispose of them.

Flowchart 3.2 in Appendix 3 summarises the rules applying to bonus units issued on or after
20 September 1985.

Bonus units issued where no amount is included in assessable income
This will depend on when the original units were acquired.

Original units acquired on or after 20 September 1985
If your bonus units relate to other units that you acquired on or after 20 September 1985,
your bonus units are taken to have been acquired on the date you acquired your original
units. If you have original units that you acquired at different times, you'll have to work out
how many of your bonus units are taken to have been acquired at each of those times.

Calculate the cost base and reduced cost base of the bonus units by apportioning the cost
base and reduced cost base of the original units over the original units and the bonus units.
Effectively, this results in a reduction of the cost base and reduced cost base of the original
units. You also apportion any calls paid on partly paid bonus units between the cost bases
(and reduced cost bases) of the original units and the bonus units.

Original units acquired before 20 September 1985
The rules that apply if you acquired your original units before 20 September 1985 depend on
when the bonus units were issued and whether they were partly paid or fully paid.

For more information, see Flowchart 3.2 in Appendix 3.

   Example 38: unit trusts
   Sarah is a unit holder in the CPA Unit Trust. She bought 1,000 units on 1 September
   1985 for $1 each and 1,000 units on 1 July 1996 for $2 each. On 1 March 1997, the unit
   trust made a one-for-one bonus unit issue to all unit holders. Sarah received
   2,000 new units. She didn't include any amount in her assessable income as a result.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                      91
    The 1,000 new units issued for the original units she acquired on 1 September 1985 are
    also treated as having been acquired on that date and are therefore not subject to
    CGT.

    However, the 1,000 new units issued for the original units she acquired on 1 July 1996
    are subject to CGT. Their cost base is worked out by spreading the cost of the original
    units ($2,000) acquired on that date over both the original units and the bonus units.
    Each of the units therefore has a cost base of $1.


Bonus units issued where an amount is included in assessable income
If you include any amount in your assessable income as a result of the issue of bonus units,
their acquisition date is the date they were issued, regardless of when you acquired the
original units.

The cost base and reduced cost base of the bonus units is the amount included in your
assessable income as a result of the issue of those units, plus any calls you made if they
were only partly paid.

If the bonus units were issued before 20 September 1985, any capital gain or capital loss is
disregarded, as they are pre-CGT assets.

Rights or options to acquire shares or units
If you own shares or units, the company or trust may issue you rights or options to acquire
additional shares or units at a specified price. The market value of these rights, at the time
the rights or options are issued to you, is non-assessable non-exempt income, provided all
of the following apply:
•    you already own shares or units
•    the right was issued to you because of your ownership of the shares or units
•    your shares or units, and the rights, mustn't be revenue assets or trading stock at the
     time they are issued
•    those rights weren't acquired under an employee share scheme
•    your shares or units, and the rights, aren't traditional securities
•    your shares or units aren't convertible interests.

You'll make a capital gain or capital loss when a CGT event happens to:
•    the rights or options, other than as a result of exercising those rights or options
•    the shares or units acquired as a result of exercising those rights or options.

The calculation of the capital gain arising from a subsequent CGT event won't be affected
by any non-assessable non-exempt income amount.

Rights and options issued directly to you from a company or trust for no cost
You're taken to have acquired the rights and options at the same time as you acquired the
original shares or units. Therefore, if you acquired the original shares or units before
20 September 1985, you disregard any capital gain or capital loss you make when the rights
or options expire or are sold, as they are pre-CGT assets.


Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                   92
If you acquired the original shares or units on or after 20 September 1985, you make a
capital gain if the capital proceeds on the sale or expiry of the rights or options are more
than their cost base. You make a capital loss if the reduced cost base of the rights or
options is more than those capital proceeds.

Rights and options you bought from a company, trust or another person If you acquired your
rights or options on or after 20 September 1985, they are treated much like any other CGT
asset and are subject to CGT.

Flowchart 3.3, Flowchart 3.4 and Flowchart 3.5 in Appendix 3 summarise the different rules
applying to the treatment of rights or options to acquire shares or units.

Exercising rights or options to acquire shares or units
Many people decide to exercise their rights or options to acquire new shares or units rather
than sell them. In most cases, no CGT is payable at the time you exercise the rights or
options.

The acquisition date of the shares or units is the date of exercise of the rights or options to
acquire the shares or units.

If you exercise the rights or options on or after 20 September 1985, some special rules apply
for calculating the cost base and reduced cost base of shares or units acquired as a result.
Exercising the option or right may be subject to the foreign resident capital gains
withholding, regardless of when the option or right was originally acquired.

The rules outlined below don't apply to rights or options to acquire shares under an
employee share scheme.

Rights or options issued for no cost as a share or unit holder
The amount included in the cost base and reduced cost base of the shares or units you
acquire on exercise of the rights or options depends on when you acquired your original
shares or units. The following rules don't apply to rights or options to acquire units issued
before 29 January 1988.

Original shares or units acquired before 20 September 1985
The first element of the cost base and reduced cost base for the shares or units you acquire
on exercising your rights or options is the sum of:
•   the market value of the rights or options at the time you exercised them
•   the amount you paid to exercise the rights or options
•   any amount that was included in your assessable income as a result of you exercising
    your rights or options on or after 1 July 2001.

Original shares or units acquired on or after 20 September 1985
The first element of the cost base and reduced cost base for the shares or units you acquire
on exercising your rights or options is the sum of:
•   the cost base of the rights or options at the time you exercised them




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                    93
•   the amount you paid to exercise the rights or options (except to the extent that the
    amount is represented in the cost base of the rights or options at the time of exercise)
•   any amount that was included in your assessable income as a result of you exercising
    your rights or options on or after 1 July 2001.

Flowchart 3.3 in Appendix 3 summarises the rules relating to the treatment of such options
and rights.

Rights or options you acquire from a share or unit holder
The amount included in the cost base and reduced cost base of the shares or units you
acquire depends on when you acquired your rights or options. The following rules don't
apply to rights or options to acquire units issued before 29 January 1988.

Rights or options acquired before 20 September 1985
If the rights or options were exercised on or after 20 September 1985, the first element of
the cost base and reduced cost base for the shares is the sum of:
•   the market value of the rights or options at the time you exercised them
•   the amount you paid to exercise the rights or options
•   any amount that was included in your assessable income as a result of you exercising
    your rights or options on or after 1 July 2001.

Rights or options acquired on or after 20 September 1985
The first element of the cost base and reduced cost base for the shares or units you acquire
on exercising your rights or options is the sum of:
•   the cost base for the rights or options (including any amount you paid for them)
•   the amount you paid for the shares or units on exercising the rights or options (except
    to the extent that the amount is represented in the cost base of the rights or options at
    the time of exercise)
•   any amount that was included in your assessable income as a result of you exercising
    your rights or options on or after 1 July 2001.

Flowchart 3.4 in Appendix 3 summarises the rules relating to the treatment of such options
and rights.

Rights or options you pay for, receive directly or acquire
Rights or options you pay for that are issued directly to you from the company or trust or
that you acquire from an individual or entity that aren't a shareholder or unit holder.

For rights or options to acquire units, these rules apply to rights or options exercised on or
after 27 May 2005.

The amount included in the cost base and reduced cost base of the shares or units you
acquire depends on when you acquired your rights or options.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                     94
Rights or options acquired before 20 September 1985
This includes rights or options last renewed or extended after that date if they were
exercised before 27 May 2005.

If the rights or options were exercised on or after 20 September 1985 the first element of
the cost base and reduced cost base for the shares or units is the sum of:
•    the market value of the rights or options at the time you exercised them
•    the amount you paid for the shares or units on exercising the rights or options.

Rights or options acquired on or after 20 September 1985
This includes rights or options you acquired before 20 September 1985 which were last
renewed or extended after that date and were exercised before 27 May 2005.

The first element of the cost base and reduced cost base for the shares or units you acquire
on exercising your rights or options is the sum of:
•    the amount you paid for the rights or options
•    the amount you paid for the shares or units on exercising the rights or options.

Flowchart 3.5 in Appendix 3 summarises the rules relating to the treatment of such options
and rights.

    Example 39: sale of rights
    Shanti owns 2,000 shares in ZAC Ltd. She bought 1,000 shares on 1 June 1985 and
    1,000 shares on 1 December 1996.

    On 1 July 1998, ZAC Ltd granted each of its shareholders one right for each 4 shares
    owned to acquire shares in the company for $1.80 each. Shanti therefore received
    500 rights in total. At that time, shares in ZAC Ltd were worth $2. Each right was
    therefore worth 20 cents.

    Shanti decided that she didn't want to buy any more shares in ZAC Ltd, so she sold all
    her rights for 20 cents each, a total amount of $100. Only those rights issued for the
    shares she bought on 1 December 1996 are subject to CGT. As Shanti didn't pay
    anything for the rights, she has made a $50 taxable capital gain on their sale.

    The $50 Shanti received on the sale of her rights for the shares she bought on 1 June
    1985 isn't subject to CGT, as those rights are taken to have been acquired at the same
    time as the shares, that is, before 20 September 1985.




    Example 40: rights exercised
    Assume that, in example 39, Shanti wanted to acquire more shares in ZAC Ltd. She
    therefore exercised all 500 rights on 1 August 1998 when they were still worth
    20 cents each.

    There are no CGT consequences arising from the exercise of the rights.



Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                 95
    However, the 500 shares Shanti acquired on 1 August 1998 when she exercised the
    rights are subject to CGT and are acquired at the time of the exercise.
    •       When Shanti exercised the rights issued for the shares she bought on 1 December
            1996, the cost base of the 250 shares she acquired is the amount she paid to
            exercise each right ($1.80 for each share).
    •       When Shanti exercised the rights for the shares she bought before 20 September
            1985, Shanti’s cost base for each of the 250 shares she acquired includes not only
            the exercise price of the right ($1.80) but also the market value of the right at that
            time (20 cents). The cost base of each share is therefore $2.


CGT discount on shares or units acquired from exercise of rights or options
You can use the discount method to calculate your capital gain from an asset only if you
own it for at least 12 months. In calculating any capital gain on shares or units you acquire
from the exercise of a right or option, the 12-month period applies from the date you acquire
the shares or units (not the date you acquired the right or option).

Retail premiums
Some or all of a payment may be a retail premium if you receive it because either:
•       you didn't exercise some or all of your right or entitlement, either by choice or otherwise
•       you weren't eligible to exercise some or all of your right or entitlement
•       you didn't receive some or all of your right or entitlement.

You receive a retail premium if:
•       you own shares in a company which offers shareholders a right or entitlement to
        subscribe for additional shares in proportion to their existing shareholding at a set
        amount, often called 'the offer price'
•       you don't participate; that is, one of the following applies
        –    you choose not to take up some or all of your right or entitlement
        –    you're ineligible to receive some or all of a right or entitlement
        –    you're not permitted to take up some or all of your right or entitlement
•       the company that issued the right or entitlement arranges to issue a number of shares,
        equivalent to those which would have been issued to you had you exercised the right or
        entitlement for which you didn't participate, to other subscribers such as institutional
        investors – the amount offered by the subscribers for the equivalent shares is often
        called 'the clearing price'
•       the clearing price is the basis of a payment to you, generally because it is more than the
        offer price.

The retail premium will be the amount paid to you, generally worked out on a pro rata basis
by the company because you're a shareholder or unit holder and you don't participate. The
retail premium the company pays will generally be a share of all or part of the difference
between the clearing price of the shares and the offer price.

A retail premium payment you receive is taxed in different ways, depending on whether it is
renounceable or non-renounceable.


Australian Taxation Office    Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                        96
If it is a renounceable right, the retail premium will constitute a capital gain.

For non-renounceable rights, retail premiums are unfranked dividends, or alternatively
ordinary income, and shouldn't be treated as capital gains. Shareholders who receive the
premiums aren't eligible to claim the CGT discount.

For more information, see Taxing retail premiums.

Convertible notes
A convertible note (which is one type of convertible interest) is another type of investment
you can make in a company or unit trust. A convertible note earns interest on the amount
you pay to acquire the note until the note’s expiry date. On expiry of the note, you can either
ask for the return of the money paid or convert the note to new shares or units.

Convertible notes you acquired after 10 May 1989 will generally not be subject to CGT if you
sold or disposed of them before they were converted into shares. Instead, you include any
gain you make in your tax return as ordinary income and any loss you make is included as a
deduction.

If the TOFA rules apply to you, gains and losses from your convertible notes may be brought
to account under those TOFA rules.

For more information, see You and your shares 2026.

If you have sold or disposed of a convertible note that you acquired before 11 May 1989,
contact us. When you phone, have the date you acquired the convertible note as this may
affect the tax treatment.

Conversion of notes to shares
The tax treatment that applies when your convertible notes are converted to shares
depends on all of the following:
•   when you acquired the convertible notes
•   the type of convertible note
•   when the conversion occurred
•   when the convertible note was issued.

Shares acquired by the conversion of convertible notes on or after 20 September 1985 will
be subject to CGT when they are sold or disposed of, as the shares are taken to be acquired
when the conversion happens.

You may have acquired the convertible notes on or after 20 September 1985 and, as a
traditional security or qualifying security, you have already included the gain you made on
the conversion of the notes in your tax return as income (or as a deduction if you made a
loss). The way you calculate the cost base of the shares varies depending on whether the
notes converted to shares before 1 July 2001 or on or after that date. Table 4 provides a
summary.

Convertible notes issued after 14 May 2002
If your convertible notes are traditional securities and were issued by a company after
14 May 2002:


Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                  97
•      any gains you make when these notes are converted or exchanged for ordinary shares
       in a company won't be ordinary income at the time of conversion or exchange, and any
       losses you make won't be deductible
•      instead, any gains or losses you make on the later sale or disposal of the shares
       (incorporating any gain or loss that would have been made on the conversion or
       exchange of the notes) will be either
       –    subject to CGT if you're an ordinary investor
       –    ordinary income (or deductible, in the case of a loss) if you're in the business of
            trading in shares and other securities.

If you're an individual who is an ordinary investor, this means you'll be able to get the benefit
of the CGT discount if you own the shares for more than 12 months.

Table 4 sets out how you calculate the cost base.


Table 4: Treatment of convertible notes acquired after 10 May 1989, converted to
shares

    Convertible note             Converted before 1 July 2001     Converted on or after 1 July 2001

    The note is a traditional    You include gain on conversion   You include gain on conversion as
    security (see note 1)        as income (or loss on            income (or loss on conversion is
    that was issued before       conversion is deducted).         deducted).
    15 May 2002.
                                 Cost base of shares includes     Cost base of shares includes cost
                                 their market value at the date   base of the convertible note, any
                                 the convertible notes were       amount paid on conversion and any
                                 converted.                       amount included in your assessable
                                                                  income on conversion.

    The note is a traditional    Not applicable.                  You disregard gain (or loss) on
    security (see note 1)                                         conversion.
    that was issued after
                                                                  Cost base of shares includes cost
    14 May 2002.
                                                                  base of the convertible note and any
                                                                  amount paid on conversion.

    The note is a qualifying     You include accrued gains as     You include accrued gains as income
    security (see note 2).       income and include any gain      and include any gain on conversion as
                                 on conversion as income (or      income (or deduct any loss on
                                 deduct any loss on               conversion).
                                 conversion).
                                                                  Cost base of shares includes cost
                                 Cost base of shares includes     base of the convertible note, any
                                 amounts paid to acquire the      amount paid on conversion and any
                                 note and any amount paid on      amount included in your assessable
                                 conversion.                      income on conversion.

Note 1: A traditional security is one that isn't issued at a discount of more than 1.5%, doesn't
bear deferred interest and isn't capital indexed. It may be, for example, a bond, a deposit
with a financial institution, or a secured or unsecured loan.




Australian Taxation Office      Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                          98
Note 2: A qualifying security is one that has a deferred income element, that is, it is issued
under terms such that the investor’s return on investment (other than periodic interest) will
be greater than 1.5% per annum.

Conversion of notes to units
This will depend on when the conversion of notes to units occurred.

Convertible notes, converted before 1 July 2001
If your convertible notes are traditional securities, the first element of the cost base and
reduced cost base of the units is their market value at the time of conversion. You disregard
any capital gain or capital loss made on their conversion to units in the unit trust.

If your convertible notes aren't traditional securities and were issued by the unit trust after
28 January 1988, the first element of the cost base and reduced cost base of the units
includes both the cost of the convertible notes and any further amount payable on their
conversion. You disregard any capital gain or capital loss made on their conversion to units
in the unit trust.

Convertible notes, converted on or after 1 July 2001
If your convertible notes are traditional securities the first element of the cost base and
reduced cost base of the units includes the sum of:
•    the cost base of the convertible notes
•    any amount paid on conversion
•    any amount included in your assessable income on conversion.

You disregard any capital gain or capital loss made on their conversion to units in the unit
trust.

Similarly, if the convertible notes aren't traditional securities and were issued by the unit
trust after 28 January 1988, the first element of the cost base and reduced cost base of the
units includes the sum of:
•    the cost base of the convertible notes
•    any amount paid on conversion
•    any amount included in your assessable income on conversion.

You disregard any capital gain or capital loss made on their conversion to units in the unit
trust.

    Example 41: converting notes to shares
    David bought 1,000 convertible notes in DCS Ltd on 1 July 1997 (that is, notes that
    were issued before 15 May 2002). The notes cost $5 each. Each convertible note is
    convertible into one DCS Ltd share. On expiry of the notes on 1 July 2000, shares in
    the company were worth $7 each. David converted the notes to shares, which are
    subject to CGT. No further amount was payable on conversion of the notes. David sold
    the shares on 4 December 2025 for $10 each.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                   99
    The $2 ($7 − $5) gain David made on the conversion of each of the notes to shares
    was assessable to David as ordinary income at the time of conversion, that is, in 2000-
    01. As such, David has no capital gain in that year.

    The $3 ($10 − $7) gain David made on the sale of each of the shares is subject to CGT.
    The $7 cost base is the market value per share on the date the notes converted to
    shares. Because he sold the shares after 11:45 am AEST on 21 September 1999 and
    owned them for at least 12 months, David can claim the CGT discount. David
    calculates his capital gain as follows:

      $3 per share × 1,000 shares = $3,000

      subtract CGT discount of 50% = $1,500
    Net capital gain = $1,500

    David includes the capital gain on his 2026 tax return.


Stapled securities
Stapled securities are created when 2 or more different securities are legally bound together
so that they can't be sold separately. Many different types of securities can be stapled
together. For example, many property trusts have their units stapled to the shares of
companies with which they are closely associated.

The effect of stapling depends on the specific terms of the stapling arrangement. The issuer
of the stapled security will be able to provide you with detailed information on their
particular stapling arrangement. However, in general, the effect of stapling is that each
individual security retains its character and there is no variation to the rights or obligations
attaching to the individual securities.

Although a stapled security must be dealt with as a whole, the individual securities that are
stapled are treated separately for tax purposes. For example, if a share in a company and a
unit in a unit trust are stapled, you:
•    continue to include separately in your tax return dividends from the company and trust
     distributions from the trust
•    work out any capital gain or capital loss separately for the unit and the share.

Because each security that makes up your stapled security is a separate CGT asset, you
must work out a cost base and reduced cost base for each separately.

If you acquired the securities after they were stapled (for example, you bought the stapled
securities on the ASX), you do this by apportioning, on a reasonable basis, the amount you
paid to acquire the stapled security (and any other relevant costs) between the various
securities that are stapled. One reasonable basis of apportionment is to have regard to the
portion of the value of the stapled security that each security represented. The issuer of the
stapled security may provide assistance in determining these amounts.


    Example 42: apportionment of cost base and reduced cost base to the
    separate securities




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                 100
   On 1 September 2004, Cathy acquired 100 JKL stapled securities, which comprised a
   share in JKL Ltd and a unit in the JKL Unit Trust. She paid $4.00 for each stapled
   security, and on the basis of the information provided to her by the issuer of the
   stapled securities, she determined that 60% of the amount paid was attributable to the
   value of the share and 40% to the value of the unit. On this basis, the first element of
   the cost base and reduced cost base of each of Cathy’s shares in JKL Ltd will be
   $2.40 ($4.00 × 60%). The first element of the cost base and reduced cost base of
   each of Cathy’s units in JKL Unit Trust will be $1.60 ($4.00 × 40%).


If you acquired your stapled securities as part of a corporate restructure you'll, during the
restructure, have owned individual securities that weren't stapled. The way you work out the
cost base and reduced cost base of each security depends on the terms of the stapling
arrangement.

The stapling doesn't result in any CGT consequences for you, because the individual
securities are always treated as separate securities. However, there may be other aspects
of the whole restructure arrangement which will result in CGT consequences for you.


   Example 43: CGT consequences associated with the stapling of securities
   Jamie acquired 100 units in the Westfield America Trust (WFA) in January 2003.
   Immediately before the merger of Westfield America Trust with Westfield Holdings Ltd
   and Westfield Trust (July 2004), the cost base of each of his units was $2.12 (total
   cost base = $212 ($2.12 × 100)).

   Under the arrangement, Jamie’s original units in WFA were firstly consolidated in the
   ratio of 0.15 consolidated WFA unit for each original WFA unit. After the consolidation,
   Jamie held 15 consolidated WFA units with a cost base of $14.13 ($212 ÷ 15) each.
   There were no CGT consequences for Jamie as a result of the consolidation of his
   units in WFA.

   Jamie then received a capital distribution of $1.01 for each consolidated unit he held.

   CGT event E4 happens as a result of the capital distribution, see Appendix 1.
   Consequently, Jamie must reduce the cost base of each of his consolidated WFA units
   by $1.01 to $13.12.

   The capital distribution was compulsorily applied to acquire a share in Westfield
   Holdings Ltd (WSF) for $0.01 and a unit in the Westfield Trust (WFT) for $1.00. The
   first element of the cost base and reduced cost base of each of Jamie’s new shares in
   WSF will be $0.01 and, for each new WFT unit, $1.00.

   The units and shares were then stapled to form a Westfield Group Security. There
   were no CGT consequences for Jamie as a result of the stapling of each consolidated
   WFA unit to each new WFT unit and WSF share.

   Following the arrangement, Jamie holds 15 Westfield Group Securities with the
   following CGT attributes:
   •   Element: Cost base (initial)
   •   WFA unit: $13.12




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                  101
    •     WFT unit: $1.00
    •     WSF share: $0.01
    •     Total: $14.13

When you dispose of your stapled securities, you must:
•       divide the capital proceeds (on a reasonable basis) between the securities that make up
        the stapled security
•       then work out whether you have made a capital gain or capital loss on each security.

Other tax provisions may apply upon disposal of some securities. For example, you include a
gain made on a traditional security in your assessable income under other tax provisions.


    Example 44: apportioning the capital proceeds between the separate
    securities
    On 1 August 1985, Kelley purchased 100 shares in XYZ Ltd for $4.00 per share. In
    August 2004, Kelley was allocated 100 units in XYZ Unit Trust under a corporate
    reorganisation of the XYZ Group. The units were acquired for $1.00 each, with the
    funds to acquire the units coming from a capital reduction made in respect of her
    shares. At that same time, Kelley’s shares in XYZ Ltd and units in XYZ Unit Trust were
    stapled and became known as XYZ stapled securities.

    Kelley disposed of all of her XYZ stapled securities on 1 March 2026 for $8.00 per
    security. On the basis of the information provided by the issuer of the stapled
    securities, Kelley determined that of this amount, 70% or $5.60 per share
    ($8.00 × 70%) was attributable to the value of her XYZ Ltd shares, and 30% or $2.40
    per unit ($8.00 × 30%) was attributable to the value of her units in the XYZ Unit Trust.

    Kelley must account for the sale of each share and unit (that make up the stapled
    security) separately.

    As Kelley acquired her XYZ Ltd shares before 20 September 1985, she disregards any
    capital gain or capital loss she makes on the disposal of these shares.

    Kelley will make a capital gain of $1.40 per unit ($2.40 − $1.00) on the disposal of her
    units in the XYZ Unit Trust. As Kelley owned those units for more than 12 months, she
    can reduce her capital gain by the 50% CGT discount after applying any capital losses.


Employee share schemes
Employee share schemes (ESS) give employees benefits such as shares or the opportunity
to buy shares or rights (including options) in the company they work for at a discounted
price. These benefits are known as ESS interests. In most cases, ESS interests are exempt
from CGT implications until the discount on the ESS interest has been taxed. When you sell
your ESS interests (or resulting shares), they're taxed under the CGT rules (or if you're a
share trader, the trading stock rules).




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                   102
CGT implications for employee shares and rights under a corporate restructure
If employee shares or rights are exchanged for replacement shares or rights in a new
company under a corporate restructure that happened on or after 1 July 2004, a roll-over
may be available so that there is no taxing point under the ESS tax rules. Corporate
restructures affected include mergers, demergers (in limited circumstances) and 100%
takeovers. Any capital gain or capital loss made on the employee shares or rights because
of the restructure will be disregarded where this roll-over applies. For more information, see
ESS – Roll-over relief.

Changing residence or working in multiple countries
There are specific CGT rules relating to ESS shares or rights held by employees who
become, or cease to be, Australian residents. There are also specific rules for temporary
residents.


Shares in an early stage innovation company
Modified CGT treatment applies to your shares in an ESIC, depending on how long you hold
the shares before a CGT event happens to them (such as the sale of the shares) and
whether you make a capital gain or capital loss from the CGT event.

However, if you invest more than $50,000 in ESICs in an income year and don't meet the
sophisticated investor requirements, you'll not be eligible for modified CGT treatment on any
of the shares acquired in that income year.


The general rules for modified CGT treatment are summarised below:

    Shares held for     Modified CGT treatment

    Less than           Any capital gain you make from a CGT event isn't disregarded.
    12 months
                        You must disregard any capital loss you make from a CGT event that happens
                        to the shares during this period.

    12 months or more   A capital gain or capital loss that you made from a CGT event happening to
    but less than       the shares is disregarded.
    10 years

    10 years or more    The first element of the cost base and reduced cost base for the share will
                        become its market value on the tenth anniversary of the share being issued to
                        you. This means that you'll recognise any capital gains or losses that happen
                        from this point in time.

For more information, see:
•      Qualifying as an early stage innovation company
•      Tax incentives for early stage investors.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                         103
If a CGT roll-over applies
Generally, special rules apply to preserve the modified CGT treatment for eligible shares in
an ESIC that are subject to a CGT roll-over. However, the modified CGT treatment doesn't
apply if the scrip for scrip roll-over or wholly-owned company roll-over applies to your ESIC
shares.

For more information, see How does the modified CGT treatment apply to a roll over.

Venture capital investment
Venture capital investors typically invest in a VCLP, an ESVCLP or an AFOF to diversify their
portfolio of venture capital assets. A VCLP, ESVCLP or an AFOF is an intermediary that
invests in shares and units and it is taxed on a 'flow through' basis.

The partners of a VCLP, an ESVCLP or an AFOF make a capital gain or capital loss from a
CGT event relating to those shares and units, not the VCLP, the ESVCLP or the AFOF itself.
For CGT purposes, each partner owns a proportion of each share or unit and calculates a
capital gain or capital loss on their share of each share or unit. A capital gain or capital loss
on your share of each share or unit may be disregarded.

For more information, see Venture capital and early stage venture capital limited
partnerships.

Carried interest (CGT event K9)
The carried interest of a general partner is the partner's entitlement to a distribution from
the VCLP, the ESVCLP or the AFOF, normally contingent on profits attained for the limited
partners in a VCLP, the ESVCLP or the AFOF. You have a capital gain when you become
entitled to receive a payment of a carried interest under CGT event K9.

Non-assessable payments
You may need to adjust the cost base of shares or units for CGT calculations if you receive a
non-assessable payment without disposing of your shares or units. A payment or
distribution can include money and property.

The amount of the non-assessable payment is adjusted to exclude certain amounts relating
to a VCLP, an ESVCLP, an AFOF and an ESIC.

You need to keep accurate records of the amount and date of any non-assessable
payments on your shares and units.

Non-assessable payments after a recent restructure
As a result of some stapling arrangements, some investors in managed funds have received
units which have a very low cost base. The payment of certain non-assessable amounts in
excess of the cost base of the units will result in these investors making a capital gain.

Non-assessable payments from a company (CGT event G1)
Non-assessable payments to shareholders aren't very common and would generally be
made only if a company has shareholder approval to reduce its share capital. If you receive
a non-assessable payment from a company (that is, a payment that isn't a dividend or an


Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                   104
amount that is taken to be a dividend for tax purposes), you need to adjust the cost base of
the shares at the time of the payment. These payments will often be referred to as a return
of capital. If the amount of the non-assessable payment isn't more than the cost base of the
shares at the time of payment, you reduce the cost base and reduced cost base by the
amount of the payment.

You make a capital gain if the amount of the non-assessable payment is more than the cost
base of the shares. The amount of the capital gain is equal to the excess. If you make a
capital gain, you reduce the cost base and reduced cost base of the shares to nil. You can't
make a capital loss from the receipt of a non-assessable payment.

Interim liquidation distributions that aren't dividends can be treated in the same way as
other non-assessable payments under CGT event G1, see Appendix 1.

The exception is if the payment is made to you by a liquidator after the declaration and the
company is dissolved within 18 months of such a payment. In this case, you include the
payment as capital proceeds on the cancellation of your shares (rather than you making a
capital gain at the time of the payment). In preparing your tax return, you may delay
declaring any capital gain until your shares are cancelled unless you're advised by the
liquidator in writing that the company won't cease to exist within 18 months of you receiving
the payment.

   Example 45: non-assessable payments
   Rob bought 1,500 shares in RAP Ltd on 1 July 1996 for $5 each, including brokerage
   and stamp duty. On 30 November 2009, as part of a shareholder-approved scheme for
   the reduction of RAP Ltd’s share capital, he received a non-assessable payment of 50
   cents per share. Just before Rob received the payment, the cost base of each share
   (without indexation) was $5.

   As the amount of the payment isn't more than the cost base (without indexation), he
   reduces the cost base of each share at 30 November 2009 by the amount of the
   payment to $4.50 ($5.00 − 50 cents). As Rob has chosen not to index the cost base,
   he can claim the CGT discount if he disposes of the shares in the future.


Non-assessable payments from a unit trust (CGT event E4 or E10)
Unit trusts often make non-assessable payments to unit holders. Depending on whether
that non-assessable payment is greater than or less than the cost base of your units in
respect of which your payment is received, you'll either make a capital gain or have the cost
base and reduced cost base of your units reduced. Your CGT obligations in this situation are
explained in Trust non-assessable payments (CGT event E4).

For units you sold during the 2025–26 income year and with respect to which you received a
non-assessable payment prior to selling, you must determine your CGT event E4 (or E10)
position separate to the calculation of any CGT event A1 position that happens on the sale
of the units. This may necessarily include adjusting the cost base and reduced cost base of
the units for the non-assessable payments you received during 2025–26 up to the date of
sale. You then use the adjusted cost base and reduced cost base to work out your A1 capital
gain or capital loss.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                105
If the unit or interest isn't in an AMIT, the CGT event is E4, and if the unit or interest is in an
AMIT, the CGT event is E10.

Non-assessable payments under a demerger
If you received a non-assessable payment under an eligible demerger, you don't adjust the
cost base and the reduced cost base of your shares or units. Instead, you adjust your cost
base and reduced cost base under the demerger rules. You may have made a capital gain
on the non-assessable payment if it exceeded the cost base of your original shares or units,
although you're able to choose a CGT roll-over.

An eligible demerger is one that happened on or after 1 July 2002 and satisfies certain tests.
The head entity will normally advise shareholders or unit holders if this is the case.

Investments in foreign hybrids
A foreign hybrid is an entity that is taxed in Australia as a company but taxed overseas as a
partnership. This can include a limited partnership, a limited liability partnership and a US
limited liability company.

If you have an investment in a foreign hybrid (referred to as being a member of a foreign
hybrid), you're treated for Australian tax purposes as having an interest in each asset of the
partnership.

As a consequence, any capital gain or capital loss made in relation to the assets of a foreign
hybrid is taken to be made by the member.

General value shifting regime (GVSR)
If you own shares in a company or units (or other fixed interests) in a trust, you may be
affected by value shifting rules. These rules may apply to you if:
•   you have interests in a company or trust in which equity or loan interests have been
    issued or bought back at other than market value, or varied such that the values of
    some interests have increased while others have decreased (direct value shifts on
    interests)
•   you have interests in an entity whose dealings (such as providing loans or other
    services, or transferring assets) with another entity are neither at market value nor arm’s
    length and both entities are under the same control or ownership (indirect value
    shifting).

For more information, see Guide to the general value shifting regime.

Using the capital gain or capital loss worksheet for shares
In example 46, Tony uses the indexation method, the discount method and the 'other'
method to calculate his capital gain so he can decide which method gives him the best
result. To calculate your capital gain when you acquire or dispose of shares, see how to
complete the Capital gain or capital loss worksheet 2026.

For a description of each method and when you can use each one, see How to work out
your capital gain or capital loss.



Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                     106
Remember that if you bought and sold your shares within 12 months, you must use the
'other' method to calculate your capital gain. If you owned your shares for 12 months or
more, you may be able to use either the discount method or the indexation method,
whichever gives you the better result.

Because each share in a parcel of shares is a separate CGT asset, you can use different
methods to work out the amount of any capital gain for shares within a parcel. This may be
to your advantage if you have capital losses to apply. See Example 12.


   Example 46: using all 3 methods to calculate a capital gain
   On 1 July 1994, Tony bought 10,000 shares in Kimbin Ltd for $2 each. He paid
   brokerage of $250 and stamp duty of $50.

   On 1 July 2025, Kimbin Ltd offered each of its shareholders one right for each 4 shares
   owned to acquire shares in the company for $1.80 each. The market value of the
   shares at the time was $2.50. On 1 August 2025, Tony exercised all rights and paid
   $1.80 per share.

   On 1 December 2025, Tony sold all his shares in Kimbin Ltd for $3.00 each. He incurs a
   brokerage of $500 and stamp duty of $50.

   Separate records

   Tony has 2 parcels of shares, those he acquired on 1 July 1994 (10,000 shares) and
   those he acquired at the time he exercised all rights, 1 August 2025 (2,500 shares). He
   needs to keep separate records for each parcel and apportion the sale brokerage of
   $500 and stamp duty of $50.

   The completed Capital gain or capital loss worksheet – Tony (PDF 107KB) shows how
   Tony can evaluate which method gives him the best result.

   He uses the 'other' method for the 2,500 shares he owned for less than 12 months, as
   he has no choice:

      $7,500 capital proceeds − $4,610 cost base = $2,890 capital gain

   For the 10,000 shares he has owned for more than 12 months, his capital gain using
   the indexation method would be:

      $30,000 capital proceeds − $22,831 cost base = $7,169 capital gain

   This means his net capital gain would be:

      $2,890 'other' method + $7,169 indexation method = $10,059 net capital gain

   For the 10,000 shares if Tony uses the discount method instead (assuming he has no
   capital losses), his capital gain would be:

      $30,000 − $20,740 = $9,260

   He applies the CGT discount of 50%:

      $9,260 × 50% = $4,630

   This means his net capital gain would be:




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                 107
      $2,890 'other' method + $4,630 discount method = $7,520 net capital gain

    In this case, for the parcel of 10,000 shares he would choose the discount method
    rather than the indexation method, as it gives him the better result (a lower net capital
    gain).


Dividend paid by a listed investment company (LIC) including LIC capital gain
If a LIC pays a dividend to you that includes a LIC capital gain amount, you may be entitled
to an income tax deduction.

You can claim a deduction if:
•    you're an individual
•    you were an Australian resident when a LIC paid you a dividend
•    the dividend included a LIC capital gain amount.

The amount of the deduction is 50% of the LIC capital gain amount. The LIC capital gain
amount will be shown separately on your dividend statement.

You don't show the LIC capital gain amount at question 18 in your supplementary tax return.

    Example 47: LIC capital gain
    Ben, an Australian resident, is a shareholder in XYZ Ltd, a LIC. For 2025–26, Ben
    received a fully franked dividend from XYZ Ltd of $70,000 including a LIC capital gain
    amount of $50,000. Ben includes the following amounts on his tax return:

    64. Franked dividend (written at question 11 – label T in his tax return) – $70,000.

    65. Add franking credit (written at question 11 – label U in his tax return) – $30,000.

    66. The total is $100,000.

    67. Subtract 50% deduction for LIC capital gain (shown as a deduction at question D8
        in his tax return) – $25,000.

    68. The net amount included in taxable income is $75,000.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                    108
Forestry managed investment scheme interests
Explains your CGT obligations if you sold or otherwise disposed of your
forestry interests in 2025–26.

Subsequent participant
You're a subsequent participant if you're not an initial participant. In most cases, this means
that you bought your forestry interest from an initial participant.

You're an initial participant if:
•    you obtained your forestry interest from the forestry manager of the scheme
•    your payment to obtain the forestry interest is used to establish trees.

How CGT affects FMIS interests of subsequent participants
You can hold your forestry interest in one of 2 ways:
•    on revenue account (for example, if you're in the business of trading forestry interests)
•    on capital account.

If you hold your forestry interest on revenue account, there will be no CGT implications for
the purchase and sale of your interest.

If you hold your forestry interest on capital account, then the CGT treatment of your forestry
interest is discussed below.

Subsequent participant in an FMIS and forestry interest held on capital
account
This section covers:
•    Treatment of costs for acquiring a forestry interest in an FMIS
•    Ongoing costs of ownership
•    Treatment of thinning receipts
•    Treatment of sale and harvest proceeds

Treatment of costs for acquiring a forestry interest in an FMIS
If you're a subsequent participant in an FMIS and hold your forestry interest on capital
account, you're not able to claim a deduction for the costs of acquiring the forestry interest.
Instead, you include these costs in the cost base or reduced cost base of your forestry
interest for CGT purposes when the interest is subsequently disposed of prior to harvest or
when the harvest proceeds are received.

    Example 48: acquiring a forestry interest in a forestry managed investment scheme
    Julian acquires a forestry interest in Australian Forests Limited (AFL), an FMIS, from
    Caroline in August 2025 for $14,000 (at market value). As Julian didn't purchase the



Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                 109
    interest from the forestry manager of the scheme, he is a subsequent participant and
    also holds the interest on capital account as he doesn't trade in securities.

    Julian isn't entitled to a deduction for the $14,000 paid to Caroline for the acquisition
    of the interest. Instead, this amount will form part of the cost base or reduced cost
    base of the interest when Julian later sells the interest or receives harvest proceeds.


Ongoing costs of ownership
You can claim a deduction for the ongoing costs of holding your forestry interest if the
amounts would have been deductible were they paid by an initial participant. That is, you
don't include these costs in your cost base or reduced cost base.

Treatment of thinning receipts
Amounts you receive for thinning are excluded from the CGT treatment of your forestry
interest. These amounts are included in your assessable income. Include this amount at
question 23 Forestry managed investment scheme income – label A in your supplementary
tax return.

    Example 49: treatment of ongoing fees and thinning receipts
    Julian pays $1,000 to AFL in annual management and services fees in each year of
    income after acquiring the interest from Caroline. These amounts aren't included in the
    cost base or reduced cost base of the forestry interest and Julian can claim a
    deduction for these amounts. This is because Julian would have been able to deduct
    these amounts if he was an initial participant.

    Julian receives $1,500 for thinning in December 2025 from AFL. This amount isn't
    subject to CGT and is instead included in his assessable income for the income year
    ended 30 June 2026.


Treatment of sale and harvest proceeds
Amounts you receive from a CGT event that happens to your forestry interest, for example
the sale of your forestry interest or as harvest proceeds, are capital proceeds for CGT
purposes; see What are capital proceeds?

Sale and harvest receipts: forestry interest no longer held
If a CGT event happens when you cease to hold your forestry interest (because you sell
your interest or receive the harvest proceeds), you'll also need to include at question 23
Forestry managed investment scheme income – label A in your supplementary tax return
the lesser of the following 2 amounts:
•    the market value of your forestry interest (at the time of the CGT event)
•    the amount (if any) by which the total forestry scheme deductions (ongoing costs of
     ownership) exceeds the incidental forestry scheme receipts (for example, thinning).

To work out any capital gain or capital loss, the cost base or reduced cost base of your
forestry interest increases by this amount.



Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                    110
    Example 50: sale of a forestry interest in an FMIS
    Julian is a subsequent participant who sold his forestry interest on 30 May 2026 at the
    market value of $20,000. He purchased the forestry interest for $14,000 on 1 August
    2025. A CGT event happens when he sells the forestry interest. The original cost base
    of his forestry interest is $14,000.

    While holding his forestry interest, he has claimed $4,000 in deductions (total forestry
    scheme deductions). This amount relates to lease fees, annual management fees, and
    the cost of felling that he has paid to the forestry manager. Julian has also received
    $1,500 as thinning proceeds (incidental forestry scheme receipts) during the same
    period. This amount was shown at question 23 Forestry managed investment scheme
    income – label A in his supplementary tax return for that income year.

    In 2025–26 Julian will also need to include $2,500 ($4,000 − $1,500) as income at
    question 23 – label A in his supplementary tax return, as this amount is less than the
    market value of the interest at the time of the sale ($20,000).

    Julian’s cost base increased from $14,000 to $16,500 ($14,000 + $2,500).

    Julian calculated the capital gain as follows:
    •     capital proceeds of $20,000
    •     subtract cost base of $16,500
    •     capital gain is $3,500.

    Julian may apply capital losses (if any) to the capital gain in determining the net capital
    gain to be included in his assessable income at question 18 Capital gains in his
    supplementary tax return. See, Capital gain or capital loss worksheet – Julian (PDF
    102KB).


If you still hold your forestry interest after the CGT event, for example you sold part of your
interest or you received partial harvest proceeds over 2 or more income years, you'll need to
apportion your income as follows:

Step 1

Work out the following 2 amounts:
•       the market value of the forestry interest (at the time of the CGT event)
•       the amount (if any) by which the total forestry scheme deductions exceeds the
        incidental forestry scheme receipts.

Step 2

Use the lesser of the 2 amounts above in the following formula:
•       amount worked out from step 1 multiplied by
•       the decrease (if any) in the market value of the forestry interest (as a result of the CGT
        event divided by the market value of the forestry interest just before the CGT event.

Step 3




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                      111
Include the resulting amount at question 23 Forestry managed investment scheme income
– label A in your supplementary tax return.

Step 4

For CGT purposes, to calculate the new cost base or reduced cost base of your forestry
interest:
•       apportion the original cost base and reduced cost base of your forestry interest by the
        change in market value of your forestry interest, and then
•       add the amount from step 3.

This apportioned cost base or reduced cost base should then be used to calculate your
capital gain or capital loss.

    Example 51: harvest proceeds over 2 income years
    John is a subsequent participant who receives harvest proceeds over 2 income years.
    He received his first harvest payment of $5,000 in 2024–25.

    The market value of John’s forestry interest was $20,000 just before he received his
    first harvest payment (which is a CGT event). After John received this first harvest
    payment, the market value of his forestry interest was reduced to $15,000. His original
    cost base was $14,000.

    In the time that he has held his interest, he has claimed $4,000 in deductions (his total
    forestry scheme deductions). This relates to lease fees, annual management fees and
    the cost of felling that he has paid to the forestry manager. John also received $1,500
    from thinning proceeds (his incidental forestry scheme receipts) in the same period.

    Step 1
    •     The market value of the forestry interest (at the time of the CGT event) = $20,000.
    •     The amount by which the total forestry scheme deductions exceed the incidental
          forestry scheme receipts: $4,000 − $1,500 = $2,500.

    The amount to use in step 2 of the calculation is $2,500.

    Step 2

         $2,500 × $5,000 ÷ $20,000 = $625

    Step 3

    John includes $625 at question 23 Forestry managed investment scheme income –
    label A in his supplementary tax return.

    Step 4

    The market value of John’s forestry interest has been reduced by 25%
    (5,000 ÷ 20,000 × 100).

    John’s adjusted cost base is:
     (25% × $14,000) + $625 = $4,125.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                    112
   Accordingly, John works out his capital gain to be $5,000 − $4,125 = $875. He
   includes $875 in calculation of his net capital gain or loss at question 18 Capital gains
   in his tax return.

   In 2025–26, John received his final harvest payment (which is a CGT event) of
   $15,000. He hasn't paid other fees in 2025–26.

   John includes the following amounts in his 2025–26 tax return:
   •   the remainder of $1,875 (that is, $2,500 – $625) from step 2 at question 23
       Forestry managed investment scheme income – label A
   •   his capital gain of $2,625 (see below) in the calculation of his net capital gain or
       loss at question 18
       –    Adjusted cost base:
             (75% × 14,000) + $1,875 = $12,375
       –    capital gain:
             capital proceeds of $15,000
       –    subtract adjusted cost base of $12,375
       –    Net capital gain is $2,625.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                   113
CGT and the TOFA rules
Explains the key provisions of the TOFA rules found in Division 230 of the
ITAA 1997.

When will the TOFA and debt deduction creation rules affect an entity's
tax return?
The TOFA rules apply to financial arrangements that an affected entity starts to have in its
first income year commencing on or after 1 July 2010 (unless it elected for the rules to apply
a year earlier).

The debt deduction creation rules will apply to all debt deductions for income years starting
on or after 1 July 2024. These rules operate to disallow related party debt deductions for
certain related party arrangements and may have an impact. For more information, see
Company tax return instructions 2026.

Which entities are affected?
The TOFA rules will apply to you if you're:
•   an authorised deposit-taking institution, securitisation vehicle or financial sector entity
    with an aggregated annual turnover of $20 million or more
•   a super entity, approved deposit fund, pooled super trust, managed investment scheme
    or entity with a similar status under foreign law relating to foreign regulation, with assets
    of $100 million or more
•   any other entity (other than an individual) which satisfies one or more of the following
    –    an aggregated turnover of $100 million or more
    –    assets of $300 million or more
    –    financial assets of $100 million or more.

If you don't meet these requirements you can elect to have the TOFA rules apply to you.

Key impacts on CGT
Where the TOFA rules apply, they will have the following key impacts on CGT:
•   They may operate to modify the cost base of, or capital proceeds from, a CGT asset.
•   A capital gain or capital loss made from a CGT asset that is a financial arrangement may
    be disregarded.
•   Certain gains and losses from hedging financial arrangements may be taxed under the
    CGT rules.

TOFA and capital proceeds and cost base rules
If the TOFA rules apply to you and you start or cease to have a financial arrangement as
consideration for the disposal of a CGT asset, the TOFA rules will operate to determine the
capital proceeds from the CGT asset. In general, the rules operate to ensure your capital
proceeds are the market value of the CGT asset at the time of its disposal.


Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                   114
In the same way, the TOFA rules may determine that the first element of the cost base and
reduced cost base of your CGT asset is the market value of the CGT asset at the time of its
acquisition.

The TOFA rules can also affect other elements of the cost base and reduced cost base if the
financial arrangement represents consideration for something obtained which is relevant to
the other elements of the cost base and reduced cost base.


   Example 52: TOFA and capital proceeds and cost base rules
   Both ABC Co and Aus Co are subject to the TOFA rules.

   On 1 July 2025, ABC Co enters into a contract to sell land to Aus Co for $250,000.
   Under the terms of the contract, title to the land passes in 6 months' time on 1 January
   2026, and payment is to be made on 1 July 2027 (that is, 18 months after title to the
   land passes). The market value of the land on 1 January 2026 is $200,000.

   On 1 January 2026 when ABC Co passes the title to the land to Aus Co it will start to
   have a financial arrangement as consideration for the disposal of its land. The TOFA
   rules will operate so that ABC Co is taken to have received an amount equal to the
   market value of the land when it is provided. Therefore, ABC Co’s capital proceeds are
   $200,000. Similarly, Aus Co’s first element of its cost base is $200,000. For both ABC
   Co and Aus Co, the additional $50,000 relates to a financial arrangement which is
   taxed under the TOFA rules and isn't subject to the CGT rules.


TOFA rules apply instead of CGT rules
Where the application of the TOFA rules results in you making a gain or loss from your
financial arrangement that is a CGT asset, a capital gain or capital loss that is made from a
CGT event that happens to the CGT asset is disregarded. In general, this doesn't apply for
super entities, where CGT remains the primary code for calculating gains and losses from
financial arrangements.

Hedging financial arrangements
The TOFA rules provide for a hedging tax-timing method that allows gains and losses from
certain hedging financial arrangements to be characterised and taxed in accordance with
the tax treatment of the underlying item being hedged. For example, if a valid hedging tax-
timing method election is in effect, gains or losses from a hedging financial arrangement
used to hedge against risks associated with a CGT asset will be treated as a capital gain or
capital loss on the same basis as the capital gain or capital loss on the underlying CGT asset
that is being hedged. If this applies to you, specify the amount of the gains or losses from
the relevant hedging financial arrangements in your Capital gains tax schedule 2026.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                  115
Real estate and main residence
Explains your CGT obligations for real estate. The CGT exemption for a main
residence is also explained.

CGT and real estate
Real estate includes vacant blocks of land, business premises, rental properties, holiday
houses and hobby farms. Apart from the main residence rules, capital gains and capital
losses on real estate are worked out under the rules set out earlier in this guide.

Land is a CGT asset. In some cases, improvements made to land are treated as separate
CGT assets, see Separate assets. A depreciating asset that is found in a building (for
example, carpet or a hot-water system) is also taken to be a separate CGT asset from the
building. When a CGT event happens to your property, you must work out a capital gain or
capital loss for each CGT asset it comprises (or balancing adjustment in the case of
depreciating assets sold with the property).

The most common CGT event that happens to real estate is its sale or disposal, CGT
event A1. The time of the event is:
•   when you enter into the contract for the disposal
•   if there is no contract, when the change of ownership occurs
•   if the asset is compulsorily acquired by an entity, the earliest of when
    –    you received compensation from the entity
    –    the entity became the asset’s owner
    –    the entity entered it under a power of compulsory acquisition
    –    the entity took possession under that power.

If land is disposed of under a contract, it is taken to have been disposed of when the
contract is entered into, not the settlement date. The fact that a contract is subject to a
condition, such as finance approval, will generally not affect this date.

You're not required to include any capital gain or capital loss in your tax return for the
relevant income year until settlement occurs. When settlement occurs, you must include any
capital gain or capital loss in your tax return for the income year in which the contract was
made. If an assessment has already been made for that income year, you may need to have
that assessment amended. Where an assessment is amended to include a net capital gain
and a liability for shortfall interest charge (SIC) arises, remission of that interest charge will
be considered on a case-by-case basis. Generally, it would be expected that the SIC would
be remitted in full where requests for amendment are lodged within a reasonable time after
the date of settlement, which, in most cases, is considered to be one month. If you consider
that the SIC should be remitted, you should provide reasons why when you request the
amendment to your assessment.

Rules to keep in mind
There are a few rules to keep in mind when you calculate your capital gain or capital loss
from real estate, in particular rules relating to:
•   the costs of owning the real estate


Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                   116
•   cost base adjustments for capital works deductions.

Costs of owning
You don't include rates, insurance, land tax, maintenance and interest on money you
borrowed to buy the property or finance improvements to it in the reduced cost base. You
only include them in the cost base if you:
•   acquired the property under a contract entered into after 20 August 1991 (or if you
    didn’t acquire it under a contract, you became the owner after that date)
•   couldn't claim a deduction for the costs because you didn't use the property to produce
    assessable income, for example, it was vacant land, your main residence, or a holiday
    home during the period.

Cost base adjustments for capital works deductions
In working out a capital gain for property that you used to produce assessable income (such
as a rental property or business premises), you may need to exclude from the cost base and
reduced cost base capital works deductions you have claimed in any income year. The same
exclusion applies if you omitted to claim, but can still claim, the deduction because the
period for amending the relevant income tax assessment hasn't expired.

For information on when property (for example, a building, structure or other capital
improvement to land) is treated for CGT purposes as a CGT asset separate from the land,
see:
•   Does capital gains tax apply to you?
•   Major capital improvements to a dwelling acquired before 20 September 1985.

You must exclude from the cost base of a CGT asset (including a building, structure or other
capital improvement to land that is treated as a separate asset for CGT purposes) the
amount of capital works deductions you claimed (or omitted to but can still claim because
the period for amending the relevant income tax assessment hasn't expired) for the asset if
you acquired the asset either:
•   after 7:30 pm AEST on 13 May 1997
•   before that time and the expenditure that gave rise to the capital works deductions was
    incurred after 30 June 1999.

However, if you omitted to claim capital works deductions because you didn't have
sufficient information to determine the amount and nature of the construction expenditure,
there is no need to exclude the amount of such deductions from the cost base of the CGT
asset.

Reduced cost base
You exclude the amount of the capital works deductions you claimed (or omitted to claim
but can still claim because the period for amending the relevant income tax assessment
hasn't expired) from the reduced cost base. However, if you omitted to claim capital works
deductions because you didn't have sufficient information to determine the amount and
nature of the construction expenditure, there is no need to exclude the amount of such
deductions from the reduced cost base of the CGT asset.



Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                              117
    Example 53: capital works deduction
    Zoran acquired a rental property on 1 July 2000 for $200,000. Before disposing of the
    property on 30 June 2026, he had claimed $10,000 in capital works deductions.

    At the time of disposal, the cost base of the property was $210,250. Zoran must
    reduce the cost base of the property by $10,000 to $200,250.


Roll-over
There is generally no roll-over or exemption for a capital gain you make when you sell an
asset and put the proceeds into a super fund. There is also no general exemption or roll-
over when you use the proceeds to purchase an identical or similar asset, or you transfer an
asset into a super fund. For example, a roll-over isn't available if you either:
•       sell a rental property and put the proceeds into a super fund
•       use the proceeds to purchase another rental property.

A roll-over may be available in special circumstances, in particular for:
•       destruction
•       compulsory acquisition of property
•       marriage or relationship breakdown.

However, an asset or the capital proceeds from the sale of an asset may be transferred into
a super fund in order to satisfy certain conditions under the small business retirement
exemption.

For more information, see Small business CGT concessions.

Keeping records
Keep appropriate records, see Records relating to real estate.

Sale of a rental property
Example 54 shows how you would calculate your capital gain on the sale of your rental
property.

The Capital gain or capital loss worksheet – Brett (PDF 105KB) shows how you would
complete the Capital gain or capital loss worksheet for this example.


    Example 54: sale of a rental property
    Brett purchased a residential rental property on 1 July 1997. The price he paid was
    $150,000, of which $6,000 was attributable to depreciating assets. He also paid
    $20,000 in total for pest and building inspections, stamp duty and solicitor’s fees.

    In the next few years, Brett incurred the following expenses on the property:
    •     interest on money borrowed $10,000
    •     add rates and land tax of $8,000


Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                118
   •    add deductible (non-capital) repairs of $15,000
   •    the total expenses are $33,000.

   Brett can't include the expenses of $33,000 in the cost base, as he was able to claim a
   deduction for them.

   When Brett decided to sell the property, a real estate agent advised him that if he
   spent around $30,000 on major structural improvements, the property would be
   valued at around $500,000. The major structural improvements were completed on
   1 October 2025 at a cost of $30,000.

   On 1 February 2026, he sold the property for $500,000 (of which $4,000 was
   attributable to depreciating assets).

   Brett couldn't claim any capital works deductions for the original construction costs, as
   construction of the property began before 18 July 1985. However, he could claim a
   capital works deduction of $255 ($30,000 × 2.5% × 124 ÷ 365) for the major structural
   improvements.

   For information on capital works that qualify for a deduction, see Rental properties
   2026. For information on how capital works deductions affect the CGT cost base, see
   Cost base adjustments for capital works deductions.

   This is Brett’s only capital gain for the year, and he has no capital losses to offset from
   this income year or previous years.

   Brett works out his cost base as follows.

   69. Purchase price of property (not including depreciating assets) is $144,000.

   70. Add:
        –   pest and building inspections, stamp duty and solicitor's fees on purchase of
            the property of $20,000
        –   capital expenditure (major structural improvements) of $30,000 and subtract
            capital works deduction of $255 which equals $29,745
        –   real estate agent’s fees and solicitor’s fees on sale of the property of $12,500

   71. The cost base unindexed is $206,245.

   Brett deducts his cost base from his capital proceeds (sale price) as follows:
   •    Proceeds from selling the house (not including depreciating assets) are $496,000.
   •    Subtract cost base unindexed
        $496,000 − $206,245 = $289,755

   He decides the discount method will give him the best result, so he uses this method
   to calculate his capital gain:

       $289,755 × 50% = $144,877

   Brett writes $144,877 at question 18 – label A in his supplementary tax return.

   Brett writes $289,755 at question 18 – label H Total current year capital gains in his
   supplementary tax return. Brett must also make balancing adjustment calculations for




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                     119
    his depreciating assets. Because he used the property 100% for taxable purposes, he
    won't make a capital gain or capital loss from the depreciating assets.


Investing in affordable housing
An additional CGT discount of up to 10% is allowed to Australian resident individuals who
invest in affordable housing.

A property qualifies as 'affordable' housing if rent is charged at below market rate, and it is
made available for eligible tenants on low to moderate incomes. The property must be
managed by an eligible community housing provider (CHP).

Only dwellings that are Australian residential premises can be used to provide affordable
housing. Commercial residential premises don't qualify as affordable housing. Caravans,
mobile homes and houseboats aren't considered residential premises.

The additional affordable housing capital gain discount applies to CGT events occurring on
or after 30 December 2020.

Eligibility for the affordable housing CGT discount
All of the following conditions must be met to qualify for up to 10% additional capital gain
discount for investing in affordable housing:
•    residential premises – the dwelling is Taxable Australian Real Property (TARP) and is
     residential premises that isn't commercial residential premises and is tenanted or
     available to be tenanted
•    property management – the tenancy of the dwelling or its occupancy is exclusively
     managed by an eligible CHP
•    affordable housing certification – the eligible CHP has given each entity that holds an
     ownership interest in the dwelling certification that the dwelling was used to provide
     affordable housing
•    NRAS – no entity that has an ownership interest in the dwelling is entitled to receive a
     National Rental Affordability Scheme (NRAS) incentive for the NRAS year
•    MIT membership – if the ownership interest in the dwelling is owned by a Managed
     Investment Trust (MIT), the tenant doesn't have an interest in the MIT that passes the
     non-portfolio test.

To qualify for the discount, an investor must have provided affordable housing on or after
1 January 2018 for a period, or intermittent periods, totalling at least 1,095 days. The
investor must have invested either directly, or through a trust including where there is an
interposed entity between the investor and the trust. The trust that provides the affordable
housing and any interposed entities may be a trust, a managed investment trust or
partnership, but can't be a public unit trust or super fund.

How to calculate the additional CGT discount
The additional affordable housing CGT discount percentage, which will be 10% or less, is
calculated as follows:

    (CGT discount percent ÷ 5) × (Affordable housing days ÷ Total ownership days)


Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                   120
Where:
•       CGT discount percentage is the discount of up to 50% on capital gains.
•       Affordable housing days are the number of days the dwelling was used to provide
        affordable housing (on or after 1 January 2018) during its ownership period (and shown
        on the affordable housing certificate), subtract the number of days when the individual
        receiving the affordable housing capital gains discount was a foreign or temporary
        resident.
•       Total ownership days are the number of days the dwelling was held from the time it was
        acquired until a CGT event occurred to it, excluding any period of foreign or temporary
        residency after 8 May 2012.

Affordable housing certificate
If you invested directly in affordable housing, you should have received an annual affordable
housing certificate from your CHP showing the number of days your investment was used to
provide affordable housing. If you invested in affordable housing through a trust or managed
investment trust, you may need to contact the trustee to get the number of affordable
housing days in order to work out your additional affordable housing CGT discount
percentage.

    Example 55: working out the aggregate period and affordable housing discount
    On 1 February 2021, Lisa purchased a dwelling that is residential premises.

    During her ownership assume Lisa uses the dwelling as follows:
    •     left it vacant and undertook repairs from when she acquired it on 1 February 2021
          (the acquisition date for CGT purposes) until 1 March 2021 (29 days)
    •     rented it out through a CHP as affordable housing from 2 March 2021 until
          4 February 2025 (1,436 days)
    •     rented it out through a real estate property manager at market rates (that is, not
          providing affordable housing) from 5 February 2025 until 31 May 2025 (116 days),
          and
    •     vacated the property on 1 June 2025 to prepare for sale on 23 June 2025.

    On 23 June 2025 (the disposal date for CGT purposes), Lisa signed a contract to sell
    the dwelling, with settlement occurring on 23 July 2025. Lisa made a capital gain of
    $100,000.

    Lisa held the dwelling for a total of 1,604 days. She used the dwelling to provide
    affordable housing for 1,436 of the 1,604 days. As Lisa used the dwelling to provide
    affordable housing for more than 1,095 days, she would be eligible for the additional
    affordable housing capital gains discount (assuming the dwelling meets the other
    requirements).

    Lisa's affordable housing capital gain discount percentage is equal to:

         (capital gain discount percentage ÷ 5) × (Affordable housing days ÷ Total
         ownership days)




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                   121
   She works this out as:

      (50% ÷ 5) × (1,436 ÷ 1,604) = 8.95% (this is the discount percent available for the
      provision of affordable housing)

   The discount percentage is equal to the sum of the capital gain discount percentage
   and the affordable housing discount capital gain percentage. That is, 58.95% (50%
   plus 8.95%).

   Lisa reduces her capital gain by the discount percentage. Lisa has capital gain of
   $100,000. She works out her capital gain after capital gains discount as:

      Capital gain × (1 − discount %)

      $100,000 × (1 − 58.95%) = $41,050

   Lisa includes only $41,050 of the $100,000 capital gain in her assessable income from
   her sale of this property, as a result of investment in affordable housing and meeting
   all its conditions.

   Note: Capital gains can also be reduced by capital losses and other concessions or
   exemptions. However, for the purpose of this example, these haven't been factored in.


For more information, see CGT discount for affordable housing.

Other CGT events affecting real estate
CGT event B1: Happens to real estate if you enter into an agreement where the new owner
is entitled to possession of the land or the receipt of rents and profits before becoming
entitled to a transfer or conveyance of the land.

Where this happens under a contract, it is known as a ‘terms contract’ and the new owner
usually completes the purchase by paying the balance of the purchase price and receiving
the instrument of transfer and title deeds.

It may also happen where an agreement is made with a relative or other party to use and
enjoy the property for a specified period, after which title to the property passes to them. It
won't happen where, under an arrangement, title to a property may pass at an unspecified
time in the future.

CGT event B1 happens when use and enjoyment of the land is first obtained by the new
owner. Use and enjoyment of the land from a practical point of view takes place at the time
the new owner gets possession of the land or the date the new owner becomes entitled to
the receipt of rents and profits.

If the agreement falls through before completion and title to the land doesn't pass to the
new owner, you may be entitled to amend your assessment for the year in which CGT event
B1 happened.

CGT event C1: Happens if an asset is lost or destroyed. This event may happen if, for
example, a building on your land is destroyed by fire. Your capital proceeds for CGT
event C1 happening include any insurance proceeds you may receive for the loss or
destruction. The market value substitution rule for capital proceeds that generally applies if
you receive no capital proceeds doesn't apply if CGT event C1 happens.



Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                 122
For more information, see Loss, destruction or compulsory acquisition of an asset.

CGT event D1: Happens if you give someone a right to reside in a dwelling. The capital
proceeds include money (but not rent) and the value of any property you receive.

The market value substitution rule for capital proceeds (see Definitions) applies if both:
•    the amount of capital proceeds you receive is more or less than the market value of the
     right
•    you and the person you granted the right to weren't dealing with each other at arm’s
     length in connection with the event.

CGT event D2: Happens if you grant an option to a person or an entity, or renew or extend
an option that you had granted.

The amount of your capital gain or capital loss from CGT event D2 is the difference between
what you receive for granting the right and any expenditure you incurred on it. The CGT
discount doesn't apply to CGT event D2.


    Example 56: granting of an option
    You were approached by Colleen, who was interested in buying your land. On 30 June
    2025, you granted her an option to purchase your land within 12 months for $200,000.
    Colleen pays you $10,000 for the grant of the option. You incur legal fees of $500. You
    made a capital gain in the 2024–25 income year of $9,500.


Exercise of an option
If the option you granted is later exercised, you ignore any capital gain or capital loss you
made from the grant, renewal or extension. You may have to amend your income tax
assessment for an earlier income year.

Similarly, any capital gain or capital loss that the grantee would otherwise make from the
exercise of the option is disregarded.

The effect of the exercise of an option depends on whether the option was a ‘call option’ or
a ‘put option’. A call option is one that binds the grantor to dispose of an asset. A put option
binds the grantor to acquire an asset.

    Example 57: granting of an option (continued)
    On 1 February 2026, Colleen exercised the option you granted her. You disregard the
    capital gain that you made in 2024–25 income year and you request an amendment of
    your income tax assessment to exclude that amount. The $10,000 you received for the
    grant of the option is considered to be part of the capital proceeds for the sale of your
    property in the 2025–26 income year. Your capital gain or capital loss from the
    property is the difference between its cost base or reduced cost base and $210,000.


CGT event D4: Happens if you enter into a conservation covenant after 15 June 2000 over
land that you own and if you receive capital proceeds for entering into the covenant.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                    123
From 1 July 2002, CGT event D4 also happens if you receive no capital proceeds for
entering into the covenant and you can claim a tax deduction for entering into the covenant.
One of the conditions for a tax deduction is that the covenant is entered into with a
deductible gift recipient or an Australian Government agency (that is, the Commonwealth, a
state, a territory or one of their authorities).

A ‘conservation covenant’ is a covenant that:
•    restricts or prohibits certain activities on the land that could degrade the environmental
     value of the land
•    is permanent and binding on current and future land owners (by way of registration on
     the title to the land where possible)
•    .

If CGT event D4 happens, you calculate your capital gain by comparing your capital
proceeds from entering into the covenant with the portion of the cost base of the land that
is attributable to the covenant.

Similarly, you calculate your capital loss by comparing your capital proceeds from entering
into the covenant with the portion of the reduced cost base of the land that is attributable to
the covenant.

The market value substitution rule for capital proceeds that generally applies if you receive
no consideration for a CGT event doesn't apply if CGT event D4 happens. Instead, the
capital proceeds are equal to the amount you can claim as a tax deduction for entering into
the covenant.

Calculate the relevant portion of the cost base and reduced cost base attributable to the
covenant using this formula:

    A × (B ÷ C)

Where:
•    A is cost base (reduced cost base)
•    B is capital proceeds from entering into the covenant over land
•    C is those capital proceeds plus the market value of the land just after you enter into the
     covenant.

As the conservation covenant will affect the value of the entire land you must use the cost
base of the entire land in calculating the cost base apportioned to the covenant. This is the
case even if the covenant specifically states within its terms that the restrictions as to use
only apply to part of the land.

CGT event D4 won't happen if you receive no capital proceeds and the conditions for a tax
deduction for entering into the covenant aren't satisfied. In this case, CGT event D1 will
apply.

CGT events involving leases
There are a number of CGT events that may apply to the lease of land.

CGT event F1: Happens if you grant a lease to a person or entity or if you extend or renew a
lease that you had previously granted. In the case of a long-term lease (one that may be


Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                 124
expected to continue for at least 50 years), you can choose to treat the grant (renewal or
extension) of the lease as a part disposal of the underlying leased property.

    Example 58: receiving an amount for granting a lease
    Elisabeth operates a profitable footwear retailing business and wishes to lease some
    shop space in a prestigious location in the Sydney CBD. However, the demand for
    shop space in the locality is great, and competition between prospective tenants is
    fierce. In order to ensure that she secures the lease of the particular shop space that
    she wants, Elisabeth pays John (the owner of the shop space) a premium of $6,000 in
    consideration for the grant of that particular lease.

    She enters into the lease on 6 September 2025, and John incurs stamp duty of $300
    and solicitor’s fees of $500 on the grant of the lease.

    John makes a capital gain of $5,200 from CGT event F1:
    •     capital proceeds of $6,000
    •     subtract incidental costs of $800 (that is, stamp duty of $300 and solicitors' fees
          of $500)
    •     capital gain is $5,200.

    For Elisabeth, this transaction results in CGT event C2 when the lease expires.


The amount of your capital gain or capital loss from CGT event F1 is the difference between
any premium you got for granting the lease and the expenditure you incurred in granting it.
The CGT discount doesn't apply to CGT event F1. The market value substitution rule for
capital proceeds that generally applies if you receive no consideration for a CGT event
doesn't apply if CGT event F1 happens.

CGT event F2: You can choose for CGT event F2 to apply (rather than CGT event F1) when
you grant, renew or extend a long-term lease (at least 50 years). It can apply if you're the
owner of the underlying land or if you grant a sub-lease.

Your capital proceeds if CGT event F2 happens are the greatest of:
•       the market value of the freehold or head lease (at the time you grant, renew or extend
        the lease)
•       the market value if you hadn't granted, renewed or extended the lease
•       any premium from the grant, renewal or extension.

There are special cost base rules that apply if you choose for CGT event F2 to apply.

For any later CGT event that happens to the land or the lessor’s lease of it, its cost base and
reduced cost base (including the cost base and reduced cost base of any building, part of a
building, structure or improvement that is treated as a separate CGT asset) excludes:
•       any expenditure incurred before CGT event F2 happens
•       the cost of any depreciating asset for which the lessor has deducted or can deduct an
        amount for its decline in value.

The 4th element of the property’s cost base and reduced cost base includes any payment
by the lessor to the lessee to vary or waive a term of the lease or for the forfeiture or


Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                    125
surrender of the lease, reduced by the amount of any input tax credit to which the lessor is
entitled for the variation or waiver.

CGT event F3: Happens if you make a payment to a lessee to vary a lease. You can only
make a capital loss from this CGT event. Your capital loss is equal to the expenditure you
incurred to change the lease.

CGT event F4: Happens if you (as lessee) receive a payment from the lessor for agreeing to
vary or waive a term of the lease.

You can't make a capital loss from this CGT event. You'll only make a capital gain from CGT
event F4 if the amount of the payment you received exceeds the cost base of your lease at
the time when the term is varied. In other cases, you'll be required to adjust the cost base of
your lease.

The market value substitution rule for capital proceeds that applies if you don't receive
market value for a CGT event doesn't apply if CGT event F4 happens.

   Example 59: payment to lessee for change in lease
   Sam is the lessor of a commercial property. His tenant, Peter, currently holds a 3-year
   lease over the property, which has another 26 months to run. A business associate of
   Sam’s wishes to lease the property from Sam for a 10-year period, beginning in
   6 months’ time, for twice the rent that Peter is currently paying. Sam approaches Peter
   with an offer of $5,000 cash for Peter to agree to vary the terms of the lease so that
   the lease will expire in 6 months’ time. Peter agrees to vary the terms on 10 August
   2024.

   Sam will make a capital loss from CGT event F3 happening. His capital loss is equal to
   the expenditure of $5,000 he incurred.

   For Peter, this transaction results in CGT event F4 happening. The cost base of Peter’s
   lease at the time of the variation was $500. He makes a capital gain of $4,500 ($5,000
   − $500).


You disregard any capital loss you make from the expiry, forfeiture, surrender or assignment
of a lease (except one granted for 99 years or more) if you didn't use it solely or mainly for
the purpose of producing assessable income, for example, if you used it for private
purposes.

CGT event F5: Happens if you, as lessor, receive a payment for changing a lease.

The amount of your capital gain or capital loss from CGT event F5 is the difference between
what you receive for changing the lease and any expenditure you incurred on it. The CGT
discount doesn't apply to CGT event F5.

Subdivision of land
If you subdivide a block of land, each block that results is registered with a separate title.
For CGT purposes, the original land parcel is divided into 2 or more separate assets.
Subdividing land doesn't result in a CGT event if you retain ownership of the subdivided
blocks. Therefore, you don't make a capital gain or a capital loss at the time of the
subdivision.


Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                     126
However, you may make a capital gain or capital loss when you sell the subdivided blocks.
The date you acquired the subdivided blocks is the date you acquired the original parcel of
land and the cost base of the original land is divided between the subdivided blocks on a
reasonable basis.

For more information, see Taxation Determination TD 97/3 Income tax: capital gains: if a
parcel of land acquired after 19 September 1985 is subdivided into lots ('blocks'), do Parts
3-1 and 3-3 of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 treat a disposal of a block of the
subdivided land as the disposal of part of an asset (the original land parcel) or the disposal
of an asset in its own right (the subdivided block)?

When the profit is ordinary income
You may have made a profit from the subdivision and sale of land which occurred in the
ordinary course of your business or which involved a commercial transaction or business
operation entered into with the purpose of making a profit. In this case, the profit is ordinary
income (see Taxation Ruling TR 92/3 Income tax: whether profits on isolated transactions
are income). You reduce any capital gain from the land by the amount otherwise included in
your assessable income.

   Example 60: land purchased before 20 September 1985, land subdivided after that
   date and house built on subdivided land
   In 1983, Mike bought a block of land that was less than 2 hectares. He subdivided the
   land into 2 blocks in May 2025 and began building a house on the rear block, which he
   finished in August 2025 and didn't use as his main residence. He sold the rear block
   (including the house) in October 2025 for $650,000. Mike got a valuation from a
   qualified valuer who valued the rear block at $450,000 and the house at $200,000.
   The construction cost of the house was $185,000.

   Mike acquired the rear block before 20 September 1985, so it isn't subject to CGT. As
   the new house was constructed after 20 September 1985 on land purchased before
   that date, the house is taken to be a separate asset from the land. Mike is taken to
   have acquired the house in May 2025, when he began building it. Mike made a capital
   gain of $15,000 ($200,000 − $185,000) when he sold the house because he didn't use
   it as his main residence.

   As Mike had owned the house for less than 12 months, he used the 'other' method to
   calculate his capital gain.




   Example 61: dwelling purchased on or after 20 September 1985 and land subdivided
   after that date
   Kym bought a house on a 0.2 hectare block of land in June 2025 for $350,000. The
   house was valued at $120,000 and the land at $230,000. Kym lived in the house as her
   main residence. She incurred $12,000 in stamp duty and legal fees purchasing the
   property.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                 127
   Kym found the block was too big for her to maintain. In January 2026, she subdivided
   the land into 2 blocks of equal size – the front one with the house on it. She incurred
   $10,000 in survey, legal and subdivision application fees, and $1,000 to connect water
   and drainage to the rear block. In March 2026, she sold the rear block for $130,000.

   As Kym sold the rear block of land separately, the main residence exemption doesn't
   apply to that land. She contacted several local real estate agents who advised her that
   the value of the front block was $15,000 higher than the rear block. Kym apportioned
   the $230,000 original cost base into $107,500 for the rear block (46.7%) and $122,500
   for the front block (53.3%). Kym incurred $3,000 legal fees on the sale.

   The cost base of the rear block is calculated as follows:
   •   cost of the land $107,500
   •   add $5,604
        46.7% of the $12,000 stamp duty and legal fees on the purchase
   •   add $4,670
        46.7% of the $10,000 cost of survey, legal and application fees
   •   add $1,000
        cost of connecting water and drainage
   •   add $3,000
        legal fees on sale
   •   The total is $121,774.

   The capital gain on the sale of the rear block is $8,226. She calculates this by
   subtracting the cost base ($121,774) from the sale price ($130,000). As Kym had
   owned the land for less than 12 months, she uses the 'other' method to calculate her
   capital gain.

   Kym will get the full exemption for her house and the front block if she uses them as
   her main residence for the full period she owns them.


Amalgamation of title
The amalgamation of the titles to various blocks of land that you own doesn't result in a CGT
event happening.

Land you acquired before 20 September 1985 that is amalgamated with land acquired on or
after that date retains its pre-CGT status.


   Example 62: amalgamation of title
   On 1 April 1984, Robert bought a block of land. On 1 June 2008, he bought another
   block adjacent to the first one. Robert amalgamated the titles to the 2 blocks into one
   title.

   Robert is taken to have 2 separate assets. The first block continues to be treated as a
   pre-CGT asset.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                 128
Examples of CGT calculations affecting real estate
There are a number of other examples in this guide that explain how to calculate your capital
gain or capital loss on the sale of real estate:
•   calculation of capital gain (including worksheet), where a person can choose the
    indexation or discount method to calculate their capital gain, see Example 13
•   calculation of capital gain on property owned for 12 months or less, see Example 9
•   recoupment of expenditure affecting CGT cost base calculation, see Example 6
•   deductions affecting CGT cost base calculations, see Example 53 and Example 54.

Main residence
Generally, if you're an individual (not a company or trust) you can ignore a capital gain or
capital loss from a CGT event that happens to your ownership interest in a dwelling that is
your main residence (also referred to as ‘your home’). However, special rules apply if the
interest in the dwelling is held by the trustee of a Special Disability Trust. In such cases, the
trustee of the Special Disability Trust will be eligible for any main residence exemption to the
extent the individual principal beneficiary of the Special Disability Trust would have been if
that individual principal beneficiary owned the interest in the dwelling.

To get the full exemption from CGT:
•   the dwelling must have been your home for the whole period you owned it
•   you mustn't have used the dwelling to produce assessable income
•   any land on which the dwelling is situated must be 2 hectares or less
•   you mustn't be an excluded foreign resident at the time the CGT event occurs.

If you inherited a dwelling or a share of a dwelling and it wasn't the deceased’s main
residence, you're unlikely to get a full exemption. See Flowchart 3.6 in Appendix 3, and
Inherited main residence.

You may get only a partial exemption if one of the following applies:
•   the dwelling was your main residence during only part of the period you owned it
•   you used the dwelling to produce assessable income
•   the land on which the dwelling is situated is more than 2 hectares.

Short absences from your home (for example, annual holidays) don't affect your exemption.

If you're a foreign resident when a CGT event happens to your residential property in
Australia you'll no longer be entitled to claim the main residence exemption, unless certain
life events occur within a continuous period of 6 years of the individual becoming a foreign
resident for tax purposes.

Where the deceased was a foreign resident, the changes may also apply to:
•   legal personal representatives, trustees and beneficiaries of deceased estates
•   surviving joint tenants
•   special disability trusts.

For more information, see:

Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                 129
•   Main residence exemption for foreign residents
•   Foreign residents and capital gains tax.

If a dwelling wasn't your main residence for the whole time you owned it, some special rules
may entitle you to a full exemption or to extend the partial exemption you would otherwise
get. These rules can apply to land or a dwelling if you:
•   choose to treat the dwelling as your main residence, even though you no longer live in it,
    see Continuing main residence status after dwelling ceases to be your main residence
•   moved into the dwelling as soon as practicable after its purchase, see Moving into a
    dwelling
•   are changing main residences, see Moving from one main residence to another
•   are yet to live in the dwelling but will do so as soon as practicable after it is constructed,
    repaired or renovated and you'll continue to live in it for at least 3 months, see
    Constructing, renovating or repairing a dwelling on land you already own
•   sell vacant land after your main residence is accidentally destroyed, see Destruction of
    dwelling and sale of land.

Special rules
There are some special CGT rules that aren't covered in this section that may affect you if
your home was:
•   destroyed and you receive money or another asset as compensation or under an
    insurance policy
•   transferred to you as a result of its conversion to strata title
•   compulsorily acquired, see Loss, destruction or compulsory acquisition of an asset.

If you own more than one dwelling during a particular period, only one of them can be your
main residence at any one time.

The exception to this rule is if you move from one main residence to another. In this case
you can treat 2 dwellings as your main residence for a limited time, see Moving from one
main residence to another.

Special rules apply if you have a different main residence from your spouse or dependent
children, see Having a different home from your spouse or dependent child.

If you're a foreign resident when a CGT event happens to your residential property in
Australia, you'll no longer be entitled to claim the main residence exemption unless certain
life events occur within a continuous period of 6 years of the individual becoming a foreign
resident for tax purposes.

Downsizer contributions and capital gains tax
A downsizer contribution allows people who are 60 years old and older (from 1 July 2022) or
55 years old and older (from 1 January 2023) at the time of making the contribution, to sell
their home and make a contribution to super based on the proceeds of the sale. This also
applies to people who may otherwise be prevented from making contributions into super
due to:



Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                   130
•   age
•   work status
•   contribution cap restrictions.

There are various criteria to be eligible to make a downsizer contribution.

To make a downsizer contribution, the capital gain or loss from the sale of the home must
be disregarded, in whole or part, because the property has been treated as your main
residence (for the purposes of the main residence exemption for CGT). A partial main
residence CGT exemption (for the purposes of the downsizer contribution eligibility) may
apply in a variety of situations, including where the home:
•   wasn't your main residence for the entire period of ownership
•   was used to produce assessable income (in whole or part) for a period of time during
    the ownership
•   is on land greater than 2 hectares.

You may not have a capital gain or loss to disregard because, for example:
•   your home was a pre-CGT asset (that is, if it was acquired before 20 September 1985)
•   your spouse owned the home that was sold.

If your home was a pre-CGT asset you can still make a downsizer contribution if would be
entitled to such an exemption if your home was a post-CGT asset rather than a pre-CGT
asset.

If your home that was sold was only owned by one spouse, the spouse that didn't have an
ownership interest may also make a downsizer contribution, or have one made on their
behalf, provided they meet all of the other requirements.

For more information, see Downsizing contributions into super.

What is a dwelling?
A dwelling is anything that is used wholly or mainly for residential accommodation. Certain
mobile homes can also be a dwelling. Examples of a dwelling are:
•   a home or cottage
•   an apartment or flat
•   a strata title unit
•   a unit in a retirement village
•   a caravan, houseboat or other mobile home.

Any land the dwelling is on is included as part of the dwelling, but it only qualifies for the
main residence exemption if the land and the dwelling are sold together. Also, the
exemption applies to a maximum of 2 hectares of land (including the land on which the
dwelling is built). Any excess is subject to CGT.

A building or a unit in a building, which is a dwelling, ceases to be a dwelling once you
commence converting it into commercial premises.

For more information, see Land adjacent to the dwelling.


Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                     131
What is an ownership interest?
In the case of a flat or home unit, you have an ownership interest if you have a:
•    legal or equitable interest in a strata title in the flat or home unit
•    licence or right to occupy the flat or home unit
•    share in a company that owns a legal or equitable interest in the land on which the flat
     or home unit is constructed and that share gives you a right to occupy the flat or home
     unit.

In the case of a dwelling that isn't a flat or home unit, you have an ownership interest if you
have either a:
•    legal or equitable interest in the land on which it is constructed
•    licence or right to occupy it.

In the case of land, you have an ownership interest if you have either a:
•    legal or equitable interest in it
•    right to occupy it.

An equitable interest may include life tenancy of a dwelling that you acquire, for example,
under a deceased’s will.

When do you acquire an ownership interest?
For the purposes of the main residence exemption, you have an ownership interest in a
dwelling or land you acquire under a contract from the time you get legal ownership (unless
you have a right to occupy it at an earlier time).

You have legal ownership of a dwelling or land from the date of settlement of the contract of
purchase (or if you have a right to occupy it at an earlier time, that time) until the date of
settlement of the contract of sale. This period is called your ownership period. If the
dwelling is on 2 hectares of land or less, is your main residence for the whole of the
ownership period and you don't use it to produce assessable income, the home is fully
exempt.

    Example 63: full exemption
    Frank signed a contract on 14 August 2001 to purchase 0.1 hectare of land from a
    developer and to have a house constructed on the land. Under the contract,
    settlement didn't occur until construction was completed on 26 October 2002.

    Frank moved into the house immediately upon settlement of the contract he had with
    the developer, that is, on 26 October 2002. He didn't have a right to occupy the house
    at an earlier time under the purchase contract. He signed the contract to sell it on
    25 May 2025 and settlement occurred on 20 July 2025. The house was Frank’s main
    residence for the full period he owned it and he didn't use any part of it to produce
    income.

    For CGT purposes, Frank is taken to have acquired the land on which the house was
    constructed on the date he entered into the contract, 14 August 2001. However,
    because the house was Frank’s main residence for the whole period between


Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                  132
   settlement of the purchase contract and settlement of the sale contract, it is fully
   exempt.

   The period between when Frank entered into the purchase contract and started to live
   in the house (14 August 2001 to 25 October 2002) is ignored. This is because the
   relevant dates for the main residence exemption are the settlement dates or, if you
   had a right under the purchase contract to occupy the dwelling at an earlier time, that
   time until settlement of the sale contract.


Even though the settlement dates are used to calculate the period for which the main
residence exemption applies, the dates you enter into the purchase and sale contracts are
important.

A CGT event occurs when you enter into the sale contract. You include any capital gain in
your tax return for the income year in which the CGT event occurs. The dates you enter into
the purchase and sale contracts are also relevant for determining what method you can use
to work out your capital gain from your main residence.

   Example 64: partial exemption
   The facts are the same as in the previous example except that Frank rented out the
   house from 26 October 2002, the date of settlement of the purchase contract, until
   2 March 2004.

   Frank makes a capital gain of $90,000 on the house. To work out the part of the
   capital gain that isn't exempt, Frank must determine how many days in his ownership
   period the dwelling wasn't his main residence.

   Frank had an ownership interest in the property from settlement of the purchase
   contract (26 October 2002) until settlement of the sale contract (20 July 2025), a total
   of 8,304 days.

   The period between the dates the purchase contract was signed (14 August 2001) and
   settled (25 October 2002) is ignored. As the house wasn't Frank’s main residence from
   26 October 2002 to 2 March 2004 (494 days), he doesn't get the exemption for this
   period.

   Frank calculates his capital gain as follows:

      $90,000 capital gain × (494 days ÷ 8,304 days) = $5,354 taxable portion

   As Frank entered into the purchase contract after 11:45 am AEST on 21 September
   1999 and entered into the sale contract after owning the house for at least 12 months,
   he can reduce his capital gain by the CGT discount of 50% after applying any capital
   losses.

   Because Frank signed the sale contract on 25 May 2025, the CGT event occurred in
   the 2024–25 income year, even though settlement occurred in the next income year.
   Frank writes the capital gain on his 2025 tax return.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                  133
Is the dwelling your main residence?
The following factors may be relevant in working out whether a dwelling is your main
residence:
•    the length of time you live there (there is no minimum time a person has to live in a
     home before it is considered to be their main residence)
•    whether your family lives there
•    whether you have moved your personal belongings into the home
•    the address to which your mail is delivered
•    your address on the electoral roll
•    the connection of services (for example, phone, gas or electricity)
•    your intention in occupying the dwelling.

A mere intention to construct or occupy a dwelling as your main residence, without actually
doing so, isn't sufficient to get the exemption.

If you weren't a resident of Australia for tax purposes while you were living in the property
you're unlikely to satisfy the requirements for the main residence exemption.

In certain circumstances, you may choose to treat a dwelling as your main residence even
though:
•    you no longer live in it; for more information, see Continuing main residence status after
     dwelling ceases to be your main residence
•    you're yet to live in it, but will do so as soon as practicable after it is constructed,
     repaired or renovated and you'll continue to live in it for at least 3 months; for more
     information, see Constructing, renovating or repairing a dwelling on land you already
     own.

Moving into a dwelling
A dwelling is considered to be your main residence from the time you acquired your
ownership interest in it if you moved into it as soon as practicable after that time. If you
purchased the dwelling, this would generally be the date of settlement of the purchase
contract. However, if there is a delay in moving in because of illness or other unforeseen
circumstances, the exemption may still be available from the time you acquired your
ownership interest in the dwelling.

If you couldn't move in because the dwelling was being rented to someone, you're not
considered to have moved in as soon as practicable after you acquired your ownership
interest.

As mentioned earlier, there is a special rule that allows you to treat more than one dwelling
as your main residence for a limited time if you're changing main residences, see Moving
from one main residence to another.


    Example 65: moving in as soon as practicable




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                    134
    Mary signs a contract to buy a townhouse on 1 March 2026. She is to take possession
    when settlement occurs on 30 April 2026.

    On 11 March 2026, Mary is directed by her employer to go overseas on an assignment
    for 4 months, leaving on 25 March 2026. Mary moves into the townhouse on her return
    to Australia in late July 2026.

    Mary’s overseas assignment was unforeseen at the time she bought the property. As
    she moved in as soon as practicable after settlement of the contract occurred, Mary
    can treat the townhouse as her main residence from the date of settlement until she
    moved in.


Land adjacent to the dwelling
The land adjacent to a dwelling is also exempt if:
•    during the period you owned it, the land is used mainly for private or domestic purposes
     in association with the dwelling
•    the total area of the land around the dwelling, including the land on which it stands, isn't
     greater than 2 hectares. If the land used for private purposes is greater than 2 hectares,
     you can choose which 2 hectares are exempt but the land you choose must include the
     land on which the dwelling is built.

Land is adjacent to your dwelling if it is close to, near, adjoining or neighbouring the
dwelling.

If you sell any of the land adjacent to your dwelling separately from the dwelling, the land
isn't exempt. It is only exempt when sold with the dwelling. There is an exception if the
dwelling is accidentally destroyed and you sell the vacant land or vacant land adjacent to
your dwelling is compulsorily acquired. See:
•    Destruction of dwelling and sale of land
•    Compulsory acquisition of part of your main residence.

Any part of the land around a dwelling used to produce income isn't exempt, even if the total
land is less than 2 hectares. However, the dwelling and any buildings and other land used in
association with it remain exempt if you don't use them to produce income.


    Example 66: land used for private purposes
    Tim bought a home with 15 hectares of land in November 2002. He uses 10 hectares of
    the land to produce income and 5 hectares for private purposes. Tim can get the main
    residence exemption for the home and 2 hectares of land he selects out of the
    5 hectares that are used for private purposes.

    Tim gets a valuation which states that the home and 2 hectares of land that he has
    selected are worth two-thirds of the total value of the property. The relative values of
    the different parts of the property remained the same between the time of purchase
    and the time of sale.

    Tim entered into a contract to sell the property on 8 May 2026. The capital gain from
    the property is $150,000. Tim may claim the main residence exemption on the two-


Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                   135
    thirds of the capital gain attributable to the house and 2 hectares of land, that is,
    $100,000.

    Because he entered into the contract to acquire the property after 11:45 am AEST on
    21 September 1999 and owned it for at least 12 months, Tim reduces his remaining
    $50,000 gain (attributable to the land) by the CGT discount of 50% after applying any
    capital losses.


Other structures associated with the dwelling
A flat or home unit often includes areas (for example, a laundry, storeroom or garage) that
are physically separate from the flat or home unit. As long as you use these areas primarily
for private or domestic purposes in association with the flat or home unit for the whole
period you own it, they are exempt on the same basis that the flat or home unit is exempt.

However, if you dispose of one of these structures separately from the flat or home unit,
they aren't exempt. If one of these structures is compulsorily acquired without your flat or
home unit also being acquired, see Compulsory acquisition of part of your main residence.

Partial exemption for main residence
If a CGT event happens to a dwelling you acquired on or after 20 September 1985 and that
dwelling wasn't your main residence for the whole time you owned it, you get only a partial
exemption.

You calculate the part of the capital gain that is taxable as follows:

    A × (B ÷ C)

Where:
•    A is total capital gain made from the CGT event
•    B is number of days in your ownership period when the dwelling wasn't your main
     residence
•    C is total number of days in your ownership period.

    Example 67: main residence for part of the ownership period
    Andrew bought a house on 1 hectare of land under a contract that was settled on
    1 July 1992 and moved in immediately. On 1 July 1995, he moved out and began to rent
    out the house. He didn't choose to treat the house as his main residence for the period
    after he moved out, although he could have done this under the continuing main
    residence status after dwelling ceases to be your main residence rule. The home first
    used to produce income rule doesn't apply because Andrew used the home to produce
    income before 21 August 1996.

    A contract for the sale of the house was entered into on 1 July 2024 and settled on
    31 August 2024 and Andrew made a capital gain of $100,000. As he is entitled to a
    partial exemption, Andrew’s capital gain is as follows:

    $100,000 × (10,655 days ÷ 11,750 days) = $90,681




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                136
    As Andrew entered into the contract to acquire the house before 11:45 am AEST on
    21 September 1999 but the CGT event occurred after this date, and he had owned the
    house for at least 12 months, Andrew can choose to use the discount method or the
    indexation method to calculate his capital gain.


If a dwelling wasn't your main residence for the whole time you owned it, some special rules
may entitle you to a full exemption or to extend the partial exemption you would otherwise
get. These rules apply to land or a dwelling if you:
•    choose to treat the dwelling as your main residence, even though you no longer live in it;
     see Continuing main residence status after dwelling ceases to be your main residence
•    moved into the dwelling as soon as practicable after its purchase; see Moving into a
     dwelling
•    are changing main residences; see Moving from one main residence to another
•    are yet to live in the dwelling but will do so as soon as practicable after it is constructed,
     repaired or renovated and you'll continue to live in it for at least 3 months; see
     Constructing, renovating or repairing a dwelling on land you already own
•    sell vacant land after your main residence is accidentally destroyed; see Destruction of
     dwelling and sale of land.

You can't choose to treat a building or a unit in a building as your main residence if
immediately after you cease to occupy it as your main residence you commence converting
it into commercial premises.

Dwelling used to produce income
Usually, you can't get the full main residence exemption if you acquired your dwelling on or
after 20 September 1985, used it as your main residence and you:
•    used any part of it to produce income during all or part of the period you owned it
•    would be allowed a deduction for interest had you incurred on money borrowed to
     acquire the dwelling (interest deductibility test).

The interest deductibility test applies regardless of whether you actually borrowed money to
acquire your dwelling. You must apply it on the assumption that you did borrow money to
acquire the dwelling.

If you rent out part of your home, you would be entitled to deduct part of the interest if you
had borrowed money to acquire the dwelling.

If you run a business or professional practice in part of your home, you would be entitled to
deduct part of the interest on money you borrowed to acquire the dwelling if:
•    part of the dwelling is set aside exclusively as a place of business and is clearly
     identifiable as such
•    that part of the home isn't readily adaptable for private use, for example, a doctor’s
     surgery located within the doctor’s home.

You wouldn't be entitled to deduct any interest expenses if, for convenience, you use a
home study to undertake work usually done at your place of work. Similarly, you wouldn't be
entitled to deduct interest expenses if you do paid child-minding at home (unless a special


Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                    137
part of the home was set aside exclusively for that purpose). In these situations, you could
still get a full main residence exemption.


   Example 68: renting out part of a home
   Thomas purchased a home under a contract that was settled on 1 July 1999 and sold it
   under a contract that was settled on 30 June 2026. The home was his main residence
   for the entire time.

   Throughout the period Thomas owned the home, a tenant rented one bedroom, which
   represented 20% of the home. Both Thomas and the tenant used the living room,
   bathroom, laundry and kitchen, which represented 30% of the home. Only Thomas
   used the remainder of the home. Therefore, Thomas would be entitled to a 35%
   deduction for interest if he had incurred it on money borrowed to acquire his home.
   The home first used to produce income rule doesn't apply because Thomas used the
   home to produce income from the date he purchased it.

   Thomas made a capital gain of $120,000 when he sold the home. Of this total gain, the
   following proportion isn't exempt:

   Capital gain × percentage of floor area = taxable portion

   $120,000 × 35% = $42,000

   As Thomas entered into the contract to acquire the home before 11:45 am AEST on
   21 September 1999, and entered into the contract to sell it after he had held it for at
   least 12 months, he can use either the indexation or the discount method to calculate
   his capital gain.


If you set aside and use part of the dwelling exclusively as a place of business, you can't get
a CGT exemption for that part of the dwelling by not claiming a deduction for the interest.
Nor can you include interest in the cost base if you're entitled to a deduction but don't claim
it.

You can still get a full main residence exemption if someone else uses part of your home to
produce income and you receive no income from that person.

When a CGT event happens to the home, the proportion of the capital gain or capital loss
that is taxable is an amount that is reasonable according to the extent to which you would
have been able to deduct the interest on money borrowed to acquire the home.

In most cases, this is the proportion of the floor area of the home that is set aside to
produce income and the period you use the home to produce income. This includes if the
dwelling is available (for example, advertised) for rent.


   Example 69: running a business in part of a home for part of the period of
   ownership
   Ruth entered into a contract to buy her home that settled before 11:45 am AEST on
   21 September 1999. Ruth owned the home for more than 12 months. The home was
   her main residence for the entire period she owned it.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                 138
    For half the period Ruth owned the home, she used part of the home to operate her
    photographic business. She modified the rooms for that purpose and they were no
    longer suitable for private and domestic use. They represented 25% of the total floor
    area of the home.

    When she sold the home, Ruth made a capital gain of $80,000. The following
    proportion of the gain is taxable:

         (A × B) × C = D

    Where:
    •     A is capital gain
    •     B is percentage of floor area not used as main residence
    •     C is percentage of period of ownership when that part of the home wasn't used as
          main residence
    •     D is taxable portion.

    ($80,000 × 25%) × 50% = $10,000

    As Ruth entered into the contract to acquire the home before 11:45 am AEST on
    21 September 1999, and entered into the contract to sell it after she had held it for at
    least 12 months, she can use either the indexation or discount method to calculate her
    capital gain.

    The home first used to produce income rule doesn't apply, because Ruth used the
    home to produce income from the date she purchased it.


For more information, see Rental properties guide 2026.

Home first used to produce income
If you start using part or all of your main residence to produce income for the first time after
20 August 1996, a special rule affects the way you calculate your capital gain or capital loss.

In this case, you're taken to have acquired the dwelling at its market value at the time you
first used it to produce income if all of the following apply:
•       you acquired the dwelling on or after 20 September 1985
•       you first used the dwelling to produce income after 20 August 1996
•       when a CGT event happens to the dwelling, you would get only a partial exemption,
        because you used the dwelling to produce assessable income during the period you
        owned it
•       you would have been entitled to a full exemption if the CGT event happened to the
        dwelling immediately before you first used it to produce income.

If all of the above apply, you must work out your capital gain or capital loss using the market
value of the dwelling at the time you first used it to produce income. You don't have a
choice.

A similar rule applies if you inherit a dwelling that was the deceased’s main residence and
you use it to produce income, see Using a home you inherited to produce income.


Australian Taxation Office    Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                  139
Full exemption
You may have made the choice to treat a dwelling as your main residence after the dwelling
ceases to be your main residence, see Continuing main residence status after dwelling
ceases to be your main residence. In this case, if the dwelling is fully exempt, the ‘home first
used to produce income’ rule doesn't apply.

In working out the amount of capital gain or capital loss, the period before the dwelling is
first used by you to produce income isn't taken into account. The extent of the exemption
depends on the period after that time and the proportion of the home used to produce
income. The following 3 examples explain this.

If the ‘home first used to produce income’ rule applies and the period between when you
first used the dwelling to produce income and the CGT event happening is less than
12 months, the CGT discount method isn't available.

   Example 70: home becomes a rental property after 20 August 1996
   Erin purchased a home on 0.9 hectares of land in July 2002 for $280,000. The home
   was her main residence until she moved into a new home on 1 August 2005. On
   2 August 2005, she commenced to rent out the old home. At that time, the market
   value of the old home was $450,000.

   Erin doesn't want to treat the old home as her main residence, as she wants the new
   home to be treated as her main residence from when she moved into it.

   On 14 April 2026, Erin sold the old home for $496,000. Erin is taken to have acquired
   the old home for $450,000 on 2 August 2005 and calculates her capital gain to be
   $46,000.

   Because Erin is taken to have acquired the old home on 2 August 2005 and has held it
   for more than 12 months, she can use the discount method to calculate her capital
   gain. As Erin has no capital losses, she includes a capital gain of $23,000 in her tax
   return 2026.




   Example 71: part of home first used to produce income after 20 August 1996
   Louise purchased a home in December 1993 for $200,000. The home was her main
   residence. On 1 November 2024, she started to use 50% of the home for a consultancy
   business. At that time the market value of the house was $320,000.

   She decided to sell the property in August 2025 for $350,000. As Louise was still living
   in the home, she couldn't get a full exemption under the continuing main residence
   status after dwelling ceases to be your main residence rule. The capital gain is 50% of
   the proceeds less the cost base.

      Percentage of use × (proceeds − cost base) = capital gain

      50% × ($350,000 − $320,000) = $15,000




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                 140
   Louise is taken to have acquired the property on 1 November 2024 at a cost of
   $320,000. Because she is taken to have acquired it at this time, Louise is taken to
   have owned it for less than 12 months and must use the 'other' method to calculate her
   capital gain.


If you make the choice to continue to treat a dwelling as your main residence after it ceases
to be your main residence (see Continuing main residence status after dwelling ceases to be
your main residence) and you don't get a full exemption, the ‘home first used to produce
income’ rule may apply.

   Example 72: dwelling used to produce income for more than 6 years and first used to
   produce income after 20 August 1996
   Roya purchased an apartment in Australia for $280,000 under a contract that was
   settled on 15 September 1995, and immediately started using the apartment as her
   main residence.

   On 29 September 1997, she moved to another city and began renting out the
   apartment. During the time she was away, she didn't acquire another dwelling and
   continued to rent out the apartment. In July 2024, she sold the apartment for
   $555,000. Settlement occurred on 29 September 2024 and she incurred $15,000 in
   real estate agent’s and solicitor’s costs.

   As Roya rented out the apartment, she is only entitled to choose to continue to treat
   the dwelling as her main residence during her absence for a maximum of 6 years, that
   is, for the period 29 September 1997 to 29 September 2003.

   As Roya is only entitled to a partial CGT exemption, she first used the property to
   produce income after 20 August 1996, and she would have been entitled to a full CGT
   exemption for the dwelling immediately before she started renting it out, she treats the
   dwelling as having been acquired on 29 September 1997 at the market value at that
   time, which was $340,000.

   Roya works out her capital gain as follows:
   •   capital proceeds of $555,000
   •   cost base of $355,000 ($340,000 + $15,000)
   •   total capital gain of $200,000.

   Non-main residence days 7,671 (30 September 2003 to 29 September 2024)

   Ownership period days 9,863 (29 September 1997 to 29 September 2024)

   $200,000 × (7,671 days ÷ 9,863 days) = $155,551

   29 September 1997 is the new deemed acquisition date.

   Roya chooses to use the discount method and, because she has no other capital gains
   or capital losses, she includes a net capital gain of $77,776 ($155,551 × 50%) in her tax
   return 2025.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                   141
Moving from one main residence to another
If you acquire a new home before you dispose of your old one, both dwellings are treated as
your main residence for up to 6 months if all of the following apply:
•    the old dwelling was your main residence for a continuous period of at least 3 months in
     the 12 months before you disposed of it
•    you didn't use the old dwelling to produce assessable income in any part of that
     12 months when it wasn't your main residence
•    the new dwelling becomes your main residence.

If you dispose of the old dwelling within 6 months of acquiring the new one, both dwellings
are exempt for the whole period between when you acquire the new one and dispose of the
old one.


    Example 73: exemption for both homes
    Jill and Norman bought their new home under a contract that was settled on 1 January
    2025 and they moved in immediately. They sold their old home under a contract that
    was settled on 15 April 2025. Both the old and new homes are treated as their main
    residence for the period 1 January to 15 April, even though they didn't live in the old
    home during that period.


If it takes longer than 6 months to dispose of your old home, both homes are exempt only
for the last 6 months before you dispose of the old one. You get only a partial exemption
when a CGT event happens to your old home.


    Example 74: partial exemption for old home
    Jeneen and John bought their home under a contract that was settled on 1 January
    2001 and they moved in immediately. It was their main residence until they bought
    another home under a contract that was entered into on 2 November 2023 and settled
    on 1 January 2024.

    They retained their old home after moving into the new one on 1 January 2024, but
    didn't use the old one to produce income. They sold the old home under a contract
    that was settled on 1 October 2024. They owned this home for a total period of
    8,675 days.

    Both homes are treated as their main residence for the period 1 April 2024 to 1 October
    2024, the last 6 months that Jeneen and John owned their old home. Therefore, their
    old home is treated as their main residence only for the period before settlement of
    their new home and during the last 6 months before settlement of the sale of the old
    home.

    The 90 days from 1 January 2024 to 31 March 2024, when the old home wasn't their
    main residence, are taken into account in calculating the proportion of their capital gain
    that is taxable (90 ÷ 8,675).

    Because they entered into the contract to acquire their old home after 11:45 am AEST
    on 21 September 1999 and entered into the contract to sell it after they had held it for



Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                   142
    at least 12 months, Jeneen and John can use the discount method to calculate their
    capital gain.


If it takes longer than 6 months to dispose of your old home, you may get an exemption for
the old home for the period in excess of the 6 months by choosing to treat it as your main
residence for that period under the ‘continuing main residence status after dwelling ceases
to be your main residence’ rule. If you do this, you get only a partial exemption when you
dispose of your new home.


    Example 75: partial exemption for new home
    The facts are the same as in the previous example, except that Jeneen and John
    choose to continue to treat their old home as their main residence for the period from
    1 January 2024 to 31 March 2024 under the continuing main residence status after
    dwelling ceases to be your main residence rule.

    This means they get a full exemption when they sell it.

    Because both homes can only be exempt for a maximum of 6 months when you're
    moving from one to the other, Jeneen and John won't get a full exemption for their
    new home when they sell it. The exemption would not be available for the new home
    for the 90 days from 1 January 2024 to 31 March 2024.


Status after dwelling ceases to be your main residence
In some cases, you can choose to treat a dwelling as your main residence even though you
no longer live in it. You can't make this choice for a period before a dwelling first becomes
your main residence. See Is the dwelling your main residence?


    Example 76: not main residence until you move in
    Therese bought a house and rented it out immediately. Later, she stopped renting it
    out and moved in.

    Therese can't choose to treat the house as her main residence during the period she
    was absent under the continuing main residence rule, because the house wasn't her
    main residence before she rented it out. She will only be entitled to a partial exemption
    if she sells the dwelling.


This choice needs to be made only for the income year that the CGT event happens to the
dwelling, for example, the year that you enter into a contract to sell it. If you own both:
•    the dwelling that you can choose to treat as your main residence after you no longer live
     in it
•    the dwelling you actually lived in during that period
     –   you make the choice for the income year
     –   you enter into the contract to sell the first of those dwellings.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                    143
If you make this choice, you can't treat any other dwelling as your main residence for that
period (except for a limited time if you're changing main residences, see Moving from one
main residence to another).

If you don't use it to produce income (for example, you leave it vacant or use it as a holiday
home) you can treat the dwelling as your main residence for an unlimited period after you
stop living in it.

If you do use it to produce income (for example, you rent it out or it is available for rent) you
can choose to treat it as your main residence for up to 6 years after you stop living in it (see
Example 72). If you make this choice and as a result of it the dwelling is fully exempt, the
home first used to produce income rule doesn't apply.


   Example 77: one period of absence of 10 years
   Lisa bought a house after 20 September 1985 but stopped using it as her main
   residence for the 10 years immediately before she sold it. During this period, she
   rented it out for 6 years and left it vacant for 4 years.

   Lisa chooses to treat the dwelling as her main residence for the period after she
   stopped living in it, so she disregards any capital gain or capital loss she makes on the
   sale of the dwelling. The maximum period the dwelling can continue to be her main
   residence while she used it to produce income is 6 years. However, while the house is
   vacant, the period she can treat the dwelling as her main residence is unlimited. This
   means the exemption applies for the whole 10 years that she was absent from the
   dwelling.

   As the dwelling is fully exempt because Lisa made the choice to treat the dwelling as
   her main residence, the home first used to produce income rule doesn't apply.

   The maximum period that Lisa can treat the dwelling as her main residence whilst it
   was being used to produce income is a total of 6 years even if the period the dwelling
   was income producing was broken by a period of vacancy. For example, if Lisa rented
   the dwelling for 4 years, left it vacant for 3 years and rented for 3 years, she could
   only treat the dwelling as her main residence for 9 of the 10 years that she wasn't
   living there.


You can choose when you want to stop the period covered by this choice.

For information on when and how you make a choice, see Choices.


   Example 78: choosing to stop the period covered by the choice early
   James bought his home in Brisbane on 1 July 2004 and moved in immediately. On
   31 July 2018, he moved to Perth and rented out his Brisbane home. James bought a
   new residence in Perth on 31 January 2024. He sold the property in Brisbane on
   31 July 2024. In completing his 2025 tax return, James decided to continue to treat the
   Brisbane property as his main residence after he moved out of it, but only until
   31 January 2024, when he purchased his new main residence in Perth.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                   144
If you rent out the dwelling for more than 6 years, the ‘home first used to produce income’
rule may apply, which means you're taken to have acquired the dwelling at its market value
at the time you first used it to produce income. See Home first used to produce income.

If you're absent more than once during the period you own the home, the 6-year maximum
period that you can treat it as your main residence while you use it to produce income
applies separately to each period of absence.


   Example 79: 2 periods of absence of 8 years
   Lana bought a house after 20 September 1985. For the last 20 years prior to selling the
   house she stopped using it as her main residence for 2 periods of 8 years. During each
   period, she rented it out for 6 years and left it vacant for 2 years. Between the first and
   second period of absence she lived in the dwelling for 2 years. She sold it 2 years after
   last returning to live in the house.

   Lana chooses to treat the dwelling as her main residence for the periods after she
   stopped living in it. She disregards any capital gain or capital loss she makes on selling
   it as the period of income production during each absence isn't more than 6 years.
   Lana is entitled to another maximum period of 6 years as she returned to live in the
   dwelling between the periods of absence. See example 80 for more detail where the
   period of income production exceeds 6 years.




   Example 80: home ceases to be the main residence and is used to produce
   income for more than 6 years during a single period of absence
   1 July 1994

   Ian settled a contract to buy a home in Sydney on 0.9 hectares of land and used it as
   his main residence.

   1 January 1996

   Ian was posted to Brisbane and settled a contract to buy another home there.

   1 January 1996 to 31 December 2000

   Ian rented out his Sydney home during the period he was posted to Brisbane.

   31 December 2000

   Ian settled a contract to sell his Brisbane home and he chose not to claim the main
   residence exemption for this property. The tenant left his Sydney home, and Ian
   decided to leave it vacant.

   The period of 5 years from 1 January 1996 to 31 December 2000 is the first period the
   Sydney home was used to produce income for the purpose of the 6-year test.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                    145
   1 January 2001

   Ian was posted from Brisbane to Melbourne for 3 years and settled a contract to buy a
   home in Melbourne. He didn't return to his Sydney home at this time.

   1 March 2001

   Ian again rented out his Sydney home, this time for 2 years.

   28 February 2003

   The tenant of his Sydney home left, and Ian again chose to leave it vacant.

   The period of 2 years from 2001 to 2003 is the second period the Sydney home was
   used to produce income under the 6-year test.

   31 December 2003

   Ian sold his home in Melbourne. Ian chose not to claim the main residence exemption
   on the sale of this property.

   31 December 2004

   Ian returned to his home in Sydney and it again became his main residence.

   28 February 2025

   Ian settled a contract to sell his Sydney home.

   As Ian didn't claim the main residence exemption for either of his Brisbane or
   Melbourne homes he is able to choose to treat the Sydney home as his main residence
   for the period after he stopped living in it. The effect of making this choice is that any
   capital gains Ian made on the sale of both his Brisbane home in 2000–01 and his
   Melbourne home in 2003–04 aren't exempt.

   Ian can't get the main residence exemption for the whole period of ownership of the
   Sydney home because the combined periods he used it to produce income (1 January
   1996 to 31 December 2000 and 1 March 2001 to 28 February 2003) during his one
   absence were more than 6 years.

   As a result, the Sydney house isn't exempt for the period it was used to produce
   income that exceeds the 6-year period, that is, one year.

   If the capital gain on the disposal of the Sydney home is $250,000, he calculates the
   amount of the gain that is taxable as follows:

   Period of ownership of the Sydney home:

   1 July 1994 to 28 February 2025 = 11,201 days

   Periods the Sydney home was used to produce income after Ian stopped living in it.

   72. 1 January 1996 to 31 December 2000 = 1,827 days.

   73. 1 March 2001 to 28 February 2003 = 730 days.

   74. A total of 2,557 days

   First 6 years the Sydney home was used to produce income.



Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                    146
   75. 1 January 1996 to 31 December 2000 = 1,827 days.

   76. 1 March 2001 to 28 February 2002 = 365 days.

   77. A total of 2,192 days.

   78. Income producing for more than 6 years after Ian stopped living in it:
       2,557 − 2,192 = 365 days

   Proportion of capital gain taxable in 2024–25

   $250,000 × (365 ÷ 11,201) = $8,147

   Because Ian entered into the contract to acquire the house before 11:45 am AEST on
   21 September 1999 and entered into the contract to sell it after that time, and owned it
   for at least 12 months, he can use either the indexation or the discount method to
   calculate his capital gain.

   The home first used to produce income rule doesn't apply because the home was first
   used by Ian to produce income before 21 August 1996.


Home used to produce income and then you stop living in it
If you use any part of your home to produce income before you stop living in it, you can't
apply the continuing main residence status after dwelling ceases to be your main residence
rule to that part. This means you can't get the main residence exemption for that part of the
dwelling either before or after you stop living in it.


   Example 81: ceasing to live in a home after part of it is used to produce
   income
   Caroline purchased a home under a contract that was settled on 1 July 1999, and she
   moved in immediately. She used 75% of the home as her main residence and the
   remaining 25% as a doctor’s surgery, which she used until 30 June 2019.

   On 1 July 2019, she moved out and rented out the home until it was sold under a
   contract that was settled on 30 June 2025. Caroline chose to treat the dwelling as her
   main residence for the 6 years she rented it out. She made a capital gain of $100,000
   when she sold the home.

   As 25% of the home wasn't used as her main residence during the period before
   Caroline stopped living in it, part of the capital gain is taxable, calculated as follows:

      $100,000 × 25% = $25,000

   Because Caroline entered into the contract to acquire the house before 11:45 am AEST
   on 21 September 1999 and sold it after she had owned it for at least 12 months, she
   can use either the indexation or the discount method to calculate her capital gain.

   The home first used to produce income rule doesn't apply because she used it to
   produce income from the time she purchased it.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                    147
Constructing, renovating or repairing a dwelling on land you already
own
Generally, if you build a dwelling on land you already own, the land doesn't qualify for
exemption until the dwelling becomes your main residence. However, you can choose to
treat land as your main residence for up to 4 years, or a longer time if allowed by the
Commissioner, before the dwelling becomes your main residence in certain circumstances.

You can choose to have this exemption apply if you acquire an ownership interest (other
than a life interest) in land and you:
•   build a dwelling on the land
•   repair or renovate an existing dwelling on the land
•   finish a partly constructed dwelling on the land.

There are conditions that you must satisfy before you can claim the exemption. You must
first finish building, repairing or renovating the dwelling and then:
•   move into the dwelling as soon as practicable after it is finished
•   continue to use the dwelling as your main residence for at least 3 months after it
    becomes your main residence. A period in which you choose to treat a dwelling as your
    main residence under the continuing main residence status after dwelling ceases to be
    your main residence rule is taken into account in working out the 3 month period.

The land, including the dwelling that is being built, renovated, repaired or finished on it, is
exempt for the shorter of the following periods:
•   the 4-year period, or a longer time if allowed by the Commissioner, immediately before
    the date the dwelling becomes your main residence
•   the period between the date you acquired the land and the date the dwelling becomes
    your main residence.

However, if after you acquired the land you or someone else occupied a dwelling that was
already on the land, the period of exemption starts from the date that dwelling was vacated.

Full exemption
If a newly constructed dwelling is built to replace a previous dwelling that was demolished
or destroyed, you can get a full exemption when you dispose of the property if:
•   the original dwelling was your main residence for the full period you owned it, you didn't
    use it to produce assessable income, and it was on land covering an area of 2 hectares
    or less
•   the new dwelling becomes your main residence as soon as practicable after it is
    completed, it continues to be your main residence until you dispose of it, and that period
    is at least 3 months
•   you make a choice to treat the vacant land and new dwelling as your main residence in
    the period starting when you stopped occupying the previous dwelling and ending when
    the new dwelling becomes your main residence, and this period is 4 years, or a longer
    period if allowed by the Commissioner, or less
•   you dispose of the land and new dwelling together.


Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                      148
The Commissioner will consider extending the 4-year period if the delay in building or
renovating the dwelling was:
•    beyond your control, for example the builder becomes bankrupt and is unable to
     complete the building or renovation
•    caused by unforeseen circumstances such as illness or injury to you or a family member
     that caused the work to be stopped.

If you make this choice, you can't treat any other dwelling as your main residence for the
period, except for a limited time under the moving from one main residence to another rule.

The effect of making the choice is that there will be an unbroken period of a main residence
occupancy on the land from the time the original dwelling became your main residence until
your new dwelling built on that land is sold.

Therefore, if you have a dwelling you acquired on or after 20 September 1985 and you live
in it while you build your new home, you must decide whether to either:
•    maintain the exemption for your old home
•    have the exemption apply to the land (including the dwelling that is being built,
     renovated, repaired or finished on it) for the shorter of either
     –   the time from when you acquire the land until the new home becomes your main
         residence
     –   the 4-year, or longer if allowed by the Commissioner, period immediately before the
         date on which the new home becomes your main residence.

If you acquired your old main residence before 20 September 1985, it is fully exempt. (The
exception is if you made major capital improvements after that date and didn't use them
exclusively as your main residence; see Major capital improvements to a dwelling acquired
before 20 September 1985).This means you'll benefit from choosing to treat the land on
which your new dwelling is to be built, renovated, repaired or finished as your main
residence for the relevant dates above.

You can't choose to have a shorter period of exemption for the new home in order to
exempt the old home for part of the construction period.

For information on when and how you make a choice, see Choices.

    Example 82: choosing to claim exemption for the land from the date of construction
    Grant bought vacant land on which he intended to build a new home under a contract
    that was settled on 3 September 2009. He bought his previous home under a contract
    that was settled on 3 November 1996.

    Grant finished building his new home on 3 September 2024. He moved into it on
    7 October 2024, which was as soon as practicable after completion. He sold his
    previous home under a contract that was settled on 1 October 2024.

    Grant can treat the new home as his main residence from 7 October 2020. In these
    circumstances, the main residence exemption applies for the period of 4 years
    immediately before the date the new home actually becomes his main residence. He




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                             149
    can also claim the exemption for his previous home from 3 November 1996 to
    6 October 2020.

    Both homes are also exempt from 1 April 2024 to 1 October 2024, the date Grant
    disposed of the old home. This is because the maximum 6-month exemption also
    applies, see Moving from one main residence to another.




If you were to die at any time between entering into contracts for the construction work and
the end of the first 3 months of residence in the new home, this exemption can still apply.

If you owned the land as a joint tenant and you die, the surviving joint tenant (or if none, the
trustee of your estate) can choose to treat the land and the dwelling as your main residence
for the shorter of either:
•    4 years before your death
•    the period starting when you acquired the land and ending when you die.

If there was already a dwelling on the land when you acquired it and someone else occupied
it after that time, the surviving joint tenant (or if none, the trustee of your estate) can choose
to treat the land and the dwelling as your main residence for the shorter of either:
•    4 years before your death
•    the period starting when the dwelling stopped being occupied so that it could be
     repaired or renovated and ending when you die.

If you're a surviving joint tenant, beneficiary or trustee of a deceased estate, you'll no longer
be entitled to claim the main residence exemption for the deceased’s ownership period:
•    if a CGT event happens to your residential property in Australia that you inherited from a
     foreign resident
•    unless certain life events occurred within a continuous period of 6 years of the
     deceased individual becoming a foreign resident for tax purposes.

For more information, see Main residence exemption for foreign residents.

Partial exemption
If a newly constructed dwelling is built to replace an original dwelling that was demolished or
destroyed more than 4 years before the new dwelling became your main residence and the
Commissioner doesn't allow a longer period, you may be entitled to a partial exemption. You
can get a partial exemption covering the period from 4 years prior to the date the new
dwelling became your main residence if:
•    the original dwelling was your main residence for the full period you owned it, you didn't
     use it to produce assessable income, and it was on land covering an area of 2 hectares
     or less
•    the new dwelling becomes your main residence as soon as practicable after it is
     completed, it continues to be your main residence until you dispose of it, and that period
     is at least 3 months
•    you make a choice to treat the vacant land and new dwelling as your main residence in
     the period of up to 4 years before the new dwelling becomes your main residence

Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                   150
•   you dispose of the land and new dwelling together.

As more than 4 years has elapsed, no exemption is available from the start of the original
ownership period to the time when the original dwelling was vacated even though the
original dwelling was the taxpayer’s main residence throughout that time.

If you don't make the choice, an exemption will only be available from the time the new
dwelling became your main residence.

A partial exemption will also be available on the sale of a newly constructed dwelling built to
replace a previous residence which wasn't your main residence for the whole time you
owned it. For example, where you had rented out your property during the original
ownership period, and you treated another dwelling as your main residence during that time.

Destruction of dwelling and sale of land
If your home is accidentally destroyed (such as through a natural disaster) and you then
dispose of the vacant land on which it was built, you can choose to apply the main
residence exemption as if the home hadn't been destroyed and continued to be your main
residence.

You can get a full exemption for the land if you used it solely for private purposes in
association with your home and it doesn't exceed 2 hectares. You can't claim the main
residence exemption for this period for any other dwelling, except for a limited time if you're
changing main residences, see Moving from one main residence to another.

You can only get this exemption where your home was accidentally destroyed. If the
destruction of your home is intentional and just after the destruction you sell the vacant
block of land, you can't get the main residence exemption.

Having a different home from your spouse or dependent child
If you and a dependent child under 18 years old have different homes for a period, you must
choose one of the homes as the main residence for both of you for the period.

If you and your spouse have different homes for a period, you and your spouse must either:
•   choose one of the homes as the main residence for both of you for the period
•   nominate the different homes as your main residences for the period.

If you and your spouse nominate different homes for the period, and you own 50% or less of
the home you have nominated, you qualify for an exemption for your share. If you own more
than 50%, your share is exempt for half the period you and your spouse had different
homes.

The same applies to your spouse. If your spouse owns 50% or less of the home they have
nominated, they qualify for an exemption for their share. However, if your spouse owns
more than 50% of the home, their share is exempt for only half the period you had different
homes.

This rule applies to each home the spouses own, whether they have sole ownership or own
the home jointly (either as joint tenants or tenants in common).

Your 'spouse' includes another person (of any sex) who:



Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                 151
•    you were in a relationship with that was registered under a prescribed state or territory
     law
•    although not legally married to you, lived with you on a genuine domestic basis in a
     relationship as a couple.

This rule applies also if you choose to treat a dwelling as your main residence when you no
longer live in it, see Continuing main residence status after dwelling ceases to be your main
residence, and this choice results in your having a different main residence from your
spouse or a dependent child for a period.

For more information, see Choices.


    Example 83: spouses with different main residences
    Under a contract that was settled on 1 July 1999, Kathy and her spouse Grahame
    purchased a townhouse, in which they lived together. Grahame owns 70% of the
    townhouse while Kathy owns the other 30%.

    Under a contract that was settled on 1 August 2001, they purchased a beach house,
    which they own in equal shares. From 1 May 2002, Kathy lives in their beach house
    while Grahame keeps living in the townhouse. Grahame nominated the townhouse as
    his main residence and Kathy nominated the beach house as her main residence.

    Kathy and Grahame sold the beach house under a contract that was settled on 15 April
    2025. As it was Kathy’s main residence and she owned 50% of it, she disregards her
    share of any capital gain or capital loss for the period she and Grahame had different
    homes (1 May 2002 to 15 April 2025).

    As Grahame didn't live in the beach house or nominate it as his main residence when
    he and Kathy had different homes, he doesn't ignore his share of any capital gain or
    capital loss for any of the period he owned it.

    Grahame and Kathy also sold the townhouse, under a contract that was settled on
    15 April 2025.

    Because Grahame owns more than 50% of the townhouse, it is taken to have been his
    main residence for half of the period when he and Kathy had different homes.

    If the total capital gain on the sale of the townhouse is $100,000, Grahame’s share of
    the capital gain is $70,000 (reflecting his 70% ownership interest). The amount of the
    gain that Grahame disregards under the main residence exemption is worked out as
    follows:

      $70,000 × (1,035 days [see note 1] ÷ 9,421 days [see note 2]) = $7,690

    Add

      $70,000 × 50% × (8,386 days [see note 3] ÷ 9,421 days [see note 2]) = $31,155

    Note 1: townhouse was Grahame’s home and he and Kathy didn't have different homes
    (1 July 1999 to 30 April 2002)

    Note 2: total ownership period (1 July 1999 to 15 April 2025)




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                 152
   Note 3: when Grahame and Kathy had the different homes (1 May 2002 to 15 April
   2025)

   The total amount disregarded by Grahame is:

       $7,690 + $31,155 = $38,845

   As Grahame bought the townhouse before 11:45 am AEST on 21 September 1999 and
   entered into the contract to sell it after owning his share for at least 12 months, he can
   use either the indexation or the discount method to calculate his capital gain.

   Kathy’s share of the $100,000 capital gain on the townhouse is $30,000, reflecting her
   30% ownership interest. The amount she disregards is:

       $30,000 × (1,035 days [see note 4] ÷ 9,421 days [see note 5]) = $3,296

   Note 4: period before 1 May 2002 when the townhouse was Kathy’s home

   Note 5: total ownership period (1 July 1999 to 15 April 2025)

   As Kathy entered into the contract to buy the townhouse before 11:45 am AEST on
   21 September 1999 and entered into the contract to sell it after owning her share for at
   least 12 months, she can use either the discount method to calculate her capital gain
   or the indexation method.




   Example 84: different main residences
   Anna and her spouse, Mark, jointly purchased a townhouse under a contract that was
   settled on 5 February 2001. They both lived in it from that date until 29 April 2025,
   when the contract of sale was settled. Anna owned more than 50% of the townhouse.

   Before 5 February 2001, Anna had lived alone in her own flat, which she rented out
   after moving to the townhouse. She then sold her flat and settled the sale on 11 March
   2002. Anna chose to treat the flat as her main residence from 5 February 2001 until
   she sold it under the continuing main residence status after dwelling ceases to be your
   main residence rule.

   Because of Anna’s choice, Mark had a different main residence from Anna for the
   period 5 February 2001 to 11 March 2002. Therefore, Mark must either:
   •    treat Anna’s flat as his main residence for that period
   •    nominate the townhouse as his main residence for that period.

   If he chooses to treat Anna’s flat as his main residence, a part of any gain Mark makes
   when he sells the townhouse will be taxable. He won't get an exemption for the
   townhouse for the period that he nominated Anna’s flat as his main residence (that is,
   5 February 2001 to 11 March 2002).

   If Mark nominates the townhouse as his main residence, he qualifies for a full
   exemption on any capital gain he makes when it is sold because he owned 50% or less
   of it. However, because Mark and Anna have different main residences as a result of




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                    153
    Mark’s choice, and Anna owns more than 50% of the flat, her gain on the flat will only
    qualify for a 50% exemption for the period from 5 February 2001 to 11 March 2002.

    Any capital gain Anna makes on the townhouse is taxable, except for the period from
    12 March 2002 to 29 April 2025 and the part that is ignored under the moving from one
    main residence to another rule.


Major capital improvements to a dwelling acquired before
20 September 1985
If you acquired a dwelling before 20 September 1985 and you make major capital
improvements after that date, part of any capital gain you make when a CGT event happens
to the dwelling could be taxable. Even though you acquired the dwelling before CGT started,
major capital improvements are considered to be separate CGT assets from the original
asset, and may therefore be subject to CGT in their own right if you make them on or after
20 September 1985.

If the dwelling is your main residence and you use the improvements as part of your home,
they're still exempt. This includes improvements on land adjacent to the dwelling (for
example, installing a swimming pool) if the total land, including the land on which the home
stands, is 2 hectares or less.

However, if the dwelling isn't your main residence or you used the improvements to produce
income for any period, the part of any gain that is attributable to the improvements for that
period is taxable.

A capital improvement to an existing structure, such as a renovation to your house, is taken
to be major if its original cost (indexed for inflation if the improvements were made under a
contract entered into before 11:45 am AEST on 21 September 1999) is both:
•    more than 5% of the amount you receive when you dispose of the dwelling
•    greater than a certain threshold. The threshold increases every income year to take
     account of inflation. Improvement thresholds for 1985–86 to 2024–25 are shown in
     Table 1.

When you dispose of the dwelling, you calculate the capital gain or capital loss on the major
improvements by taking away the cost base of the improvements from the proceeds of the
sale that are reasonably attributable to the improvements:

    A=B−C

Where:
•    A is capital gain on major improvements
•    B is proceeds of sale attributable to improvements
•    C is cost base of improvements.

You can choose to calculate the capital gain made on the improvements using either the
indexation or the discount method if all of the following apply:
•    the improvements were made under a contract entered into at or before 11:45 am AEST
     on 21 September 1999



Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                 154
•    the dwelling was sold after that time
•    you owned the improvements for at least 12 months.

If you entered into the contract to make the improvements after 11:45 am AEST on
21 September 1999 and you owned them for more than 12 months, you can calculate your
capital gain using the CGT discount of 50%.

In calculating the amount of capital proceeds to be attributed to the improvements, you
must take whatever steps are appropriate to work out their value. If you make an estimate of
this amount, it must be reasonable and you must be able to show how you arrived at the
estimated amount.


    Example 85: improvement to a dwelling acquired before 20 September 1985
    Martin bought a home in 1984. On 1 December 1989, he undertook major renovations
    to his home, costing $150,000. He sold the home for $500,000 under a contract that
    was settled on 1 December 2024. At the date of sale, the indexed cost base of the
    improvements was $186,750.

    Of the $500,000 he received for the home, $200,000 could be attributed to the
    improvements. Martin used the improvements to produce income from the time they
    were finished until the time he sold them with the home.

    The home first used to produce income rule doesn't apply to the improvements
    because they were first used to produce income before 21 August 1996.

    The cost base of the improvements is more than 5% of the $500,000 capital proceeds
    (that is, $25,000) and more than the 2024–25 threshold of $182,665. Therefore,
    because the improvements were used to produce income, the capital gain on the
    improvements is taxable. (Because the improvements were made under a contract
    entered into before 11:45 am AEST on 21 September 1999 the indexed cost base can
    be used.)

    As Martin acquired the improvements before 11:45 am AEST on 21 September 1999
    and sold the home after he had held the improvements for at least 12 months, he could
    use either the indexation method or the discount method to calculate his capital gain
    on the improvements.

    Martin calculates his capital gain using the indexation method as follows:

    79. Amount of proceeds attributable to the improvements is $200,000.

    80. Subtract cost base of improvements indexed for inflation of $186,750.

    81. Total taxable capital gain is $13,250.

    Martin’s capital gain using the discount method (assuming he has no capital losses or
    other capital gains in the 2024–25 income year and doesn't have any unapplied net
    capital losses from earlier years) is:

    82. Amount of proceeds attributable to the improvements is $200,000.

    83. Subtract cost base of improvements (without indexation) of $150,000.

    84. Equals a capital gain of $50,000.



Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                155
   85. Subtract 50% discount of $25,000.

   86. The net capital gain is $25,000.

   Martin chooses the indexation method because this gives him a lower capital gain.

   Note: If the improvements had been used as part of Martin’s main residence, this gain
   would be exempt. However, if the home (including the improvements) had been rented
   out for one-third of the period, one-third of the capital gain made on the improvements
   would have been taxable.

   If construction of the improvements started after 13 May 1997 and they were used to
   produce income, Martin would also reduce the cost base by the amount of any capital
   works deductions he claimed or can claim, see Cost base adjustments for capital
   works deductions. If Martin makes a capital loss, the reduced cost base of the
   improvements is reduced by the amount of any capital works deductions irrespective
   of when construction started.


Buildings or structures constructed on land acquired before
20 September 1985
Buildings or structures constructed on or after 20 September 1985 on land acquired before
that date are also considered to be separate CGT assets from the original land. The major
capital improvement threshold and 5% of capital proceeds rules don't apply to them.
Therefore, they may be subject to CGT if you use them other than as your main residence.

Dwellings transferred after marriage or relationship breakdown
Special rules apply to dwellings transferred to you from a spouse, or a company or trustee
of a trust, if the marriage or relationship breakdown roll-over applies.

For more information, see Real estate and main residence.

Inherited main residence
If you inherit a deceased person’s dwelling, you may be exempt or partially exempt when a
CGT event happens to it. The same exemptions apply if a CGT event happens to a
deceased’s estate of which you're the trustee. Flowchart 3.6 in Appendix 3 sets out the full
exemption rules if you inherit a dwelling. Alternatively, the rules are set out below.

If you're a joint tenant and another joint tenant dies, their interest in the dwelling is taken to
pass in equal shares to you and any other surviving joint tenants on that date.

For the purpose of the main residence exemption, you're treated as if that interest in the
dwelling has passed to you as beneficiary of the deceased estate, which means the
following rules apply to that interest.

If you're a surviving joint tenant, beneficiary or trustee of a deceased estate and a CGT
event happens to your residential property in Australia that you inherited from a foreign
resident, you may no longer be entitled to claim the main residence exemption for the
deceased’s ownership period, depending on the length of time the deceased had been a
foreign resident.



Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                    156
If you inherit an Australian residential property from a deceased person who had been a
foreign resident for 6 years or less at the time of their death, the main residence exemption
that the deceased accrued for the dwelling is available to you as the beneficiary. The main
residence exemption means you may not pay CGT on any capital gain made after you sell or
dispose of the inherited property, depending on the use of the property by both you and the
deceased.

If you inherit an Australian residential property from a deceased person who had been a
foreign resident for more than 6 years at the time of their death, any main residence
exemption that the deceased person may have accrued for that dwelling isn't available to
you. This means you may have to pay CGT when you sell or dispose of the property.

If you inherit an Australian residential property and you have been a foreign resident for
more than 6 years when you sell or dispose of the property, you can't claim the main
residence exemption for your ownership period.

For more information, see Foreign residents and inherited property.

Full exemption
A full exemption will be applied depending on when the deceased died and when they
acquired the property.

Deceased died before 20 September 1985
As you acquired the dwelling before 20 September 1985, any capital gain you make is
exempt. However, major capital improvements you make to the dwelling on or after
20 September 1985 may be taxable, see Major capital improvements to a dwelling acquired
before 20 September 1985.

Deceased died on or after 20 September 1985
A. The deceased acquired the dwelling before 20 September 1985 (it doesn't matter
whether the dwelling was the main residence of the deceased person).

You may have an ownership interest in a dwelling that passed to you as a beneficiary in a
deceased estate or you may have owned it as trustee of a deceased estate. In either case,
you disregard any capital gain or capital loss you make from a CGT event that happens to
the dwelling if either of the following 2 conditions applies:

87. You disposed of your ownership interest within 2 years of the person’s death, that is, if
    the dwelling was sold under a contract, settlement occurred within 2 years. This
    exemption applies whether or not you used the dwelling as your main residence or to
    produce income during the 2-year period. The Commissioner has the discretion to
    extend the 2-year period for CGT events (such as a sale) happening in the 2008–09
    income year and later years, see Commissioner may extend the 2-year time period.

88. From the deceased’s death until you disposed of your ownership interest, the dwelling
    wasn't used to produce income and was the main residence of one or more of
    a.   a person who was the spouse of the deceased immediately before the deceased’s
         death (but not a spouse who was permanently separated from the deceased)
    b.   an individual who had a right to occupy the home under the deceased's will
         (including a right to occupy the home as a result of a court order under the relevant


Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                 157
         family provision legislation that takes effect as if it had been made as a codicil to
         the deceased's will)
    c.   you, as a beneficiary, if you disposed of the dwelling as a beneficiary.

The dwelling can be the main residence of one of the above people (even though they may
have stopped living in it) if they choose to treat it as their main residence under the
continuing main residence status after dwelling ceases to be your main residence rule.

The requirement that the dwelling is the main residence of an individual who had a right to
occupy it under the deceased’s will is satisfied if the individual moves into the dwelling when
it is first practicable to do so. This requirement will be satisfied where the delay in moving is
because the dwelling can't be occupied until probate and administration of the estate is
granted.

B. The deceased acquired the dwelling on or after 20 September 1985.

You disregard any capital gain or capital loss you make when a CGT event happens to the
dwelling or your ownership interest in the dwelling if either of the following 2 points applies:

89. Condition 2 in A above is met and the dwelling passed to you as beneficiary or trustee
    on or before 20 August 1996. For this to apply, the deceased must have used the
    dwelling as their main residence from the date they acquired it until their death, and
    they mustn't have used it to produce income.

90. One of the conditions in A above is met, and the dwelling passed to you as beneficiary
    or trustee after 20 August 1996, and just before the date the deceased died it was
    a.   their main residence
    b.   not being used to produce income.

A dwelling can still be regarded as the deceased’s main residence even though they
stopped living in it, see Continuing main residence status after dwelling ceases to be your
main residence.

   Example 86: full exemption
   Rodrigo was the sole occupant of a home he bought in April 1992. He didn't live in or
   own another home.

   He died in January 2024 and left the house to his son, Petro. Petro rented out the
   house and then disposed of it 15 months after his father died.

   Petro is entitled to a full exemption from CGT, as he acquired the house after
   20 August 1996 and disposed of it within 2 years of his father’s death.

   If Petro didn't sell the house within 2 years of his father's death due to circumstances
   beyond his control, he may ask the Commissioner to grant an extension of time, see
   Commissioner may extend the 2-year time period.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                     158
Partial exemption
If you don't qualify for a full exemption from CGT for the home, you may be entitled to a
partial exemption.

You calculate your capital gain or capital loss as follows:

   Capital gain or capital loss amount × (non-main residence days ÷ total days)

Non-main residence days

‘Non-main residence days’ is the number of days that the dwelling wasn't the main
residence.

91. If the deceased acquired the dwelling before 20 September 1985, non-main residence
    days is the number of days in the period from their death until settlement of your
    contract for sale of the dwelling when it wasn't the main residence of one of the
    following
    a.   a person who was the spouse of the deceased (except a spouse who was
         permanently separated from the deceased)
    b.   an individual who had a right to occupy the dwelling under the deceased’s will
    c.   you, as a beneficiary, if you disposed of the dwelling as a beneficiary.

Total days

92. If the deceased acquired their ownership interest before 20 September 1985, ‘total
    days’ is the number of days from their death until you disposed of your ownership
    interest.

93. If the deceased acquired the ownership interest on or after 20 September 1985, total
    days is the number of days in the period from when the deceased acquired the dwelling
    until you disposed of your ownership interest.

A further adjustment may be required if the dwelling was a main residence, but was partly
used to produce income, for example, if, for a period, part of it was rented out or used as a
place of business.

   Example 87: partial exemption
   Vicki bought a house under a contract that was settled on 12 February 1996 and she
   used it solely as a rental property. When she died on 17 November 1999, the house
   became the main residence of her beneficiary, Lesley. Lesley sold the property under a
   contract that was settled on 27 November 2024.

   As Vicki had never used the property as her main residence, Lesley can't claim a full
   exemption from CGT. However, as Lesley used the house as her main residence, she is
   entitled to a partial exemption from CGT.

   Vicki owned the house for 1,375 days and Lesley then lived in the house for
   9,143 days, a total of 10,517 days. Assuming Lesley made a capital gain of $100,000,
   the taxable portion is:

   $100,000 × (1,375 ÷ 10,517) = $13,074



Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                159
    In working out her capital gain, Lesley can use either the discount method or the
    indexation method. This is because, for the purposes of using those methods, she is
    taken to have acquired the property on 12 February 1996 (when Vicki acquired it) and
    this is before 11:45 am AEST on 21 September 1999, and more than 12 months before
    Lesley entered into the contract to sell it.


If you dispose of your ownership interest in a dwelling within 2 years of the person’s death,
you can ignore the main residence days and total days in the period from the person’s death
until you dispose of the dwelling if this lessens your tax liability. See, Commissioner may
extend the 2-year time period.

You also ignore any non-main residence days before the deceased’s death in calculating the
capital gain or capital loss if all of the following apply:
•    you acquired the dwelling after 20 August 1996
•    the dwelling was the deceased’s main residence just before their death
•    the dwelling wasn't being used to produce income at the time of their death
•    the deceased wasn't a foreign resident for a continuous period of more than 6 years just
     before the deceased's death.

Using a home you inherited to produce income
If a person acquired their main residence on or after 20 September 1985, and they died and
it passed to you as a beneficiary (or as trustee of their estate) after 20 August 1996, you're
taken to have acquired the dwelling at its market value at the time you first used it to
produce your income if:
•    you first used the dwelling to produce income after 20 August 1996
•    when a CGT event happens to the dwelling, you would get only a partial exemption
     because you used the dwelling to produce assessable income during the period you
     owned it
•    you would have been entitled to a full exemption if the CGT event happened to the
     dwelling immediately before you first used it to produce income
•    the CGT event didn't happen to the dwelling within 2 years of the person’s date of
     death.

If all of the above apply, you must work out your capital gain or capital loss using the market
value of the dwelling at the time you first used it to produce income. You don't have a
choice.

Cost to you of acquiring the dwelling
If you acquire a dwelling the deceased had owned, there are special rules for calculating
your cost base.

These rules apply in calculating any capital gain or capital loss when a CGT event happens
to the dwelling.

The first element of the cost base and reduced cost base of a dwelling (its acquisition cost)
is its market value at the date of death if either:



Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                160
•    the dwelling was acquired by the deceased before 20 September 1985
•    the dwelling passes to you after 20 August 1996 (but not as a joint tenant), and it was
     the main residence of the deceased immediately before their death and wasn't being
     used to produce income at that date.

In any other case, your acquisition cost is the deceased’s cost base and reduced cost base
on the day they died. You may need to contact the trustee or the deceased’s recognised tax
adviser to obtain the details. If that cost base includes indexation, you must recalculate it to
exclude the indexation component if you prefer to use the discount method to work out your
capital gain from the property.

If you're a beneficiary, the cost base and the reduced cost base also include amounts that
the trustee of the deceased’s estate would have been able to include in the cost base and
reduced cost base.

Continuing main residence status
If the deceased wasn't living in the home at the date of their death, they or their trustee may
have chosen to continue to treat it as their main residence. You may need to contact the
trustee or the deceased’s recognised tax adviser to find out whether this choice was made.
If it was, the dwelling can still be regarded as the deceased’s main residence for either:
•    an indefinite period, if the dwelling wasn't used to produce income after the deceased
     stopped living in it
•    a maximum of 6 years after they stopped living in it, if it was used to produce income
     after they stopped living in it.

    Example 88: continuing main residence status
    Aldo bought a house in March 1997 and lived in it.

    He moved into a nursing home in December 2019 and left the house vacant. He chose
    to treat the house as his main residence after he stopped living in it under the
    Continuing main residence status after dwelling ceases to be your main residence rule.

    Aldo died in February 2025 and the house passed to his beneficiary, Con, who uses
    the house as a rental property.

    As the house was Aldo’s main residence immediately before his death and wasn't
    being used to produce income at that time, Con can get a full exemption for the period
    Aldo owned it.

    If Con rented out the house and sold it more than 2 years after Aldo’s death, the capital
    gain for the period from the date of Aldo’s death until Con sold it is taxable, unless the
    Commissioner grants Con an extension of time.

    If Con had sold the house within 2 years of Aldo’s death, he could have ignored the
    main residence days and total days between Aldo’s death and him selling it, which
    would have given him exemption for this period.

    If Aldo had rented out the house after he stopped living in it, he could also have
    chosen to continue to treat it as his main residence. The house would be considered to
    be his main residence until his death because he rented it out for less than 6 years.



Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                     161
    If this choice had been made, Con would get an exemption for the period Aldo owned
    the house.




Commissioner may extend the 2-year time period
A trustee or beneficiary of a deceased estate may apply to the Commissioner for an
extension of the 2-year time period. Generally, the Commissioner would exercise the
discretion in situations where the delay is due to circumstances which are outside of the
control of the beneficiary or trustee, for example:
•    the ownership of a dwelling or a will is challenged
•    the complexity of a deceased estate delays the completion of administration of the
     estate
•    a trustee or beneficiary is unable to attend to the deceased estate due to unforeseen or
     serious personal circumstances arising during the 2-year period (for example, the
     taxpayer or a family member has a severe illness or injury)
•    settlement of a contract of sale over the dwelling is unexpectedly delayed or falls
     through for circumstances outside the beneficiary or trustee’s control.

These examples aren't exhaustive.

In exercising the discretion, the Commissioner will also take into account whether and to
what extent the dwelling is used to produce assessable income and for how long the trustee
or beneficiary held the ownership interest in the dwelling.

In certain circumstances you may be eligible to use the safe harbour to extend the 2–year
period without having to apply to the Commissioner to exercise discretion. For more
information, see Extensions to the 2-year ownership period.

Inheriting a dwelling from someone who inherited it themselves
The formula for calculating the partial main residence exemption is adjusted if the deceased
individual also acquired the interest in the dwelling on or after 20 September 1985 as a
beneficiary (or trustee) of a deceased estate. The main residence exemption is calculated
having regard to the number of days the dwelling was the main residence of yourself and
the previous beneficiaries.


    Example 89: partial exemption for beneficiaries
    Ahmed acquired a dwelling after 20 September 1985.

    The dwelling was his main residence from the date of settlement of the contract for
    purchase until he died. The number of days Ahmed owned the dwelling was 3,700.

    Under his will, Ahmed left the dwelling to his son, Fayez. Fayez was the sole
    beneficiary of Ahmed’s estate. No other individual had a right to occupy the dwelling
    under Ahmed’s will.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                162
    Some years later, Fayez died. He had owned the dwelling for 2,600 days and it wasn’t
    his main residence at any time during this period.

    The dwelling was left to Mardianah under Fayez’s will.

    Mardianah sold the dwelling in 2024–25 and made a capital gain of $100,000. She
    owned the dwelling for 750 days and it wasn’t her main residence at any time during
    that period.

    The taxable proportion of Mardianah’s $100,000 capital gain is $47,518. This is worked
    out as follows:

    $100,000 × (2,600 + 750) ÷ (2,600 + 750 + 3,700) = $47,518

    Because the combined period that Ahmed, Fayez and Mardianah owned the dwelling
    was more than 12 months, Mardianah can reduce her $47,518 capital gain by the 50%
    discount (after deducting any capital losses).

    Because Mardianah gets an exemption for the period the dwelling was Ahmed’s main
    residence, her capital gain is less than it otherwise would have been.


For more information, see Deceased estates.

Death during construction
If an individual entered into a contract to construct, repair or renovate a home on land they
already owned, and they die before certain conditions are met, the trustee may choose to
have the home and land treated as the deceased’s main residence. It is treated as their main
residence for up to 4 years before the home became (or was to become) their main
residence.

The trustee can make this choice if the deceased dies before:
•    the home is finished
•    it was practicable for the home to be their main residence
•    they had lived in the home for 3 months.

If the trustee makes this choice, no other dwelling can be treated as the deceased’s main
residence during that time.

If the trustee of a deceased estate disposes of residential property in Australia that was
owned by a foreign resident, the trustee may no longer be entitled to claim the main
residence exemption for the deceased’s ownership period.

For more information, see Main residence exemption for foreign residents.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                 163
Loss, destruction or compulsory acquisition of an asset
Explains your CGT obligations if your CGT asset is lost, destroyed or
compulsorily acquired.

Roll-over concession
Generally, there are no CGT obligations for assets acquired before 20 September 1985 (pre-
CGT).

There may be a situation where you receive money or another CGT asset (or both) as
compensation when you dispose of an asset involuntarily (or under an insurance policy
against the risk of such an event happening). In this case, you may be able to choose to
either:
•   defer your liability to pay tax on any capital gain arising on the disposal
•   get a CGT exemption for any replacement asset if you acquired the original asset before
    20 September 1985.

This concession is known as a roll-over. It may be available if one of the following events
happens:
•   All or part of your CGT asset is lost or destroyed for example because it was destroyed
    by a bushfire or cyclone.
•   Your CGT asset is compulsorily acquired by an Australian Government agency.
•   Your CGT asset is compulsorily acquired by an entity (other than by an Australian
    Government agency or a foreign government agency) under a power of compulsory
    acquisition conferred by an Australian or foreign law. However, the compulsory
    acquisition of minority interests (such as shares in a company) under the Corporations
    Act or similar foreign law are excluded.
•   You dispose of your CGT asset to an entity (other than a foreign government agency)
    after a notice is served on you inviting you to negotiate a sale agreement. You must
    have been informed that, if the negotiations are unsuccessful, the asset will be
    compulsorily acquired under a power of compulsory acquisition conferred by an
    Australian or foreign law. However, the compulsory acquisition of minority interests
    (such as shares in a company) under the Corporations Act or similar foreign law are
    excluded.
•   You dispose of land to an entity (other than a foreign government agency) where a
    mining lease was compulsorily granted over the land, the lease significantly affected
    your use of the land, the lease was in force immediately before the disposal and the
    entity to which you disposed of the land was the lessee.
•   You dispose of land to an entity (other than a foreign government agency) where a
    mining lease would have been compulsorily granted over the land, the lease would have
    significantly affected your use of the land and the entity to which you disposed of the
    land would have been the lessee.
•   A lease that had been granted to you by an Australian Government agency under a
    Commonwealth, state or territory law expires and isn't renewed.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                  164
This roll-over isn't available for plant disposed of after 11:45 am AEST on 21 September 1999
and other depreciating assets from 1 July 2001. Instead, if a depreciating asset is lost or
destroyed or, acquired compulsorily or by forced negotiation (other than by a foreign
government agency), the capital allowances provisions may allow for a balancing
adjustment offset.

This means that rather than including an amount in your assessable income by way of a
balancing adjustment, you can offset that amount against the cost of a replacement asset
(or assets).

If you choose to take roll-over, you don't need to lodge a written election stating your
choice, it will be clear from the way you prepare your tax return.

You can't choose to defer a capital loss but you can use it to reduce any capital gain made
in the current income year or a later income year.

For roll-over relief to apply, the replacement asset you receive can't be a car, motorcycle or
similar vehicle.

From 1 July 2001, for roll-over relief to apply, the replacement asset you receive can't
become an item of your trading stock, nor can it be a depreciating asset.

Compulsory acquisition of part of your main residence
For certain compulsory acquisitions, an optional roll-over may apply to a particular
arrangement to which the exemption for part of a main residence also applies. The roll-over
may apply to that arrangement to the extent that the compulsory acquisition exemption
doesn't apply.

A compulsory acquisition of part of your main residence may not qualify for the roll-over as
the requirement that you acquire a replacement asset that is used for the same (or a similar)
purpose may not be able to be met. For example, if vacant land adjacent to your home is
compulsorily acquired, you may not be able to acquire replacement adjacent land.

In this case, the main residence exemption may apply to the compulsory acquisition (or
similar arrangement) of part of your main residence such as vacant land or structures.

For more information, see Main residence – compulsory acquisition.

Time of the CGT event
You need to know the time of a CGT event to work out in which income year a capital gain
or capital loss affects your income tax.

If an asset is lost or destroyed and you receive compensation, the time of the CGT event is
when you first receive the compensation. For example, if the asset is destroyed in a disaster
and you receive an insurance pay out the time of the CGT event is when you receive the
insurance payout.

If you don't receive any compensation, the time of the CGT event is when the loss is
discovered or the destruction occurred.

If your asset was compulsorily acquired by an entity under an Australian law or foreign law,
the time of the CGT event is the earliest of when:



Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                165
•    you first received compensation from the entity
•    the entity became the asset's owner
•    the entity enters the asset (for example, land) or takes possession of it.

If an entity acquires your asset following negotiation (rather than compulsorily acquiring it),
the time of the CGT event is either:
•    the date the contract to acquire it is made
•    the date of the change of ownership if there is no contract.

If a lease that had been granted to you by an Australian government agency expires and
isn't renewed, the time of the CGT event is when the lease expires.

If you receive money
If you receive money because a CGT event happens, you can choose a roll-over only if
either:
•    you incur expenditure in acquiring another CGT asset that is used either
     –   in your business or is installed ready for use in the business for a reasonable period
         if the original asset was a business asset
     –   otherwise, for a reasonable period for the same or a similar purpose as the original
         asset
•    part of the original asset is lost or destroyed and you incur expenditure of a capital
     nature in repairing or restoring it.

You must incur at least some of the expenditure either:
•    no earlier than one year before the event happens
•    within one year after the end of the income year in which the event happens.

This period may be extended in special circumstances.


    Example 90: roll-over applies
    Trish paid for the repair of an asset in January 2025, for which she was compensated
    after part of it was destroyed on 1 September 2024. Trish received an insurance
    payout as compensation for the damage to her asset on 12 December 2024. Her
    capital expenditure qualifies for the roll-over concession because it was incurred
    between 13 December 2023 to 30 June 2026.

    The replacement asset need not be identical to the one it is replacing. However, for a
    roll-over to apply, you must use it in the same business (or for the same or a similar
    purpose) as the one for which you used the original asset. Also, your replacement
    asset can't become an item of trading stock, nor can it be a depreciating asset.




    Example 91: roll-over doesn't apply




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                  166
    Denise receives money when her manufacturing business premises are destroyed. She
    buys a rental property with this money.

    Denise can't access the roll-over concession because she doesn't use the rental
    property for the same or similar purpose as her old business premises.


Consequences of receiving money
If you receive money (for example an insurance payout) and choose to take a roll-over, the
consequences depend on whether you acquired the original asset:

94. before 20 September 1985

95. on or after 20 September 1985, and
     a.   the money received for the asset is more than the cost of repair or replacement
     b.   the money received doesn't exceed the cost of repair or replacement.

1. Original asset acquired before 20 September 1985
If you acquired the original asset before 20 September 1985, you're taken to have acquired
the repaired or replacement asset before that day if either:
•    you repair or restore the original asset
•    you replace the original asset either
     –    at a cost of no more than 120% of its market value at the time of the event
     –    at any cost, provided it (or part of it) was lost or destroyed by a natural disaster and
          the replacement asset is substantially the same.

This means you disregard any capital gain or capital loss you make when a later CGT event
happens to the repaired or replacement asset.

2. Original asset acquired on or after 20 September 1985
If you acquired the original asset on or after 20 September 1985, the way roll-over applies
will depend on whether the money you received is more or less than the cost of repairing or
replacing the asset. If it is more, it also depends on whether the capital gain you make when
the event happens is either:
•    more than that excess
•    less than or equal to that excess.

a. Money received is more than the cost of repair or replacement
If you don't use all of the money you received to repair or replace the original asset, this
affects your CGT obligations. The amount of capital gain you include in your tax return
depends on whether the capital gain is more or less than the difference between the amount
you received and the cost of the repair or replacement.

If the capital gain is more than that difference, you reduce your capital gain to the amount of
the excess. Include this amount in your tax return in the year the event happens. This gain
may be eligible for the CGT discount. For more information see How to work out your capital
gain or capital loss.



Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                   167
When a later CGT event happens, you reduce the amount of expenditure included in the
cost base of the asset by the difference between the capital gain before it is reduced and
the excess. This enables you to defer part of your CGT liability until a later CGT event
happens.

If the capital gain is less than or equal to the excess (the compensation amount less the cost
of the repair or replacement), you don't reduce the capital gain and the amount of the
expenditure on the repair or replacement included in the cost base, see Example 93.

b. Money received doesn't exceed the cost of repair or replacement
If the amount of money you received is less than or equal to the expenditure you incurred to
repair or replace the original asset, you disregard any capital gain. You reduce the
expenditure you include in the cost base of the asset when a later CGT event happens by
the amount of the gain, see example 92.

   Example 92: money received is less than expenditure incurred
   Gerard’s business premises were destroyed by a bushfire fire on 15 January 2025. He
   received $246,000 in compensation from his insurance company.

   It cost him $257,000 to reconstruct the premises, $11,000 more than the amount of
   compensation he received.

   Gerard made a capital gain of $2,000 because his cost base apportioned to the
   building was $244,000 at the time of the fire.

   96. Compensation money received is $246,000.

   97. Subtract cost base of $244,000.

   98. The total capital gain is $2,000.

   99. Compensation money received is $246,000.

   100.    Subtract replacement expenditure of $257,000.
   101. Shortfall amount is $11,000.

   As the compensation money doesn't exceed the repair expenditure, Gerard disregards
   the capital gain.

   However, the amount of expenditure that Gerard can include in the cost base of the
   repaired building is reduced by the amount of the capital gain ($2,000) to $255,000.




   Example 93: money received is more than the expenditure incurred
   Assume that, in the previous example, Gerard incurred only $240,000 for repairs and
   the cost attributed to the building was $230,000.

   102.    Compensation money received is $246,000.

   103.    Subtract cost base of $230,000.



Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                               168
    104.   The total capital gain is $16,000.

    105.   Compensation money received is $246,000.

    106.   Subtract replacement expenditure of $240,000.
    107.   Total excess is $6,000.

    The compensation money ($246,000) is $6,000 more than the replacement
    expenditure ($240,000). The capital gain ($16,000) is $10,000 more than the excess of
    $6,000. The capital gain is reduced to the excess amount of $6,000.

    Gerard’s capital gain (before applying the CGT discount of 50%) is $6,000. Therefore,
    assuming he hasn't made any other capital losses or capital gains in the 2024–25
    income year (and doesn't have any unapplied net capital losses from earlier years)
    Gerard includes $3,000 ($6,000 × 50%) as his net capital gain for the 2024–25 income
    year.

    Also, he reduces the expenditure he incurred on the replacement asset by the balance
    of the capital gain ($10,000) to $230,000. This means $10,000 of the capital gain is
    deferred.


For more information, see Insurance payouts after a disaster.

If you receive an asset
If you receive a replacement asset when the CGT event happens, you can choose a roll-over
only if:
•    the replacement asset isn't a depreciating asset, not a registered emissions unit or held
     as trading stock when you acquire it
•    the market value of the replacement asset is more than the cost base of the original
     asset just before the event happened.

Consequences of receiving an asset
If you choose to take a roll-over when you receive a replacement asset, you disregard any
capital gain you make from the original asset. The other consequences are outlined below.

Original asset acquired before 20 September 1985
If you acquired the original asset before 20 September 1985, you're taken to have acquired
the new asset before that day.

Original asset acquired on or after 20 September 1985
If you acquired the original asset on or after 20 September 1985, the first element of the
cost base and reduced cost base of the replacement asset is taken to be the cost base and
reduced cost base of the original asset at the time of the event.

However, you may have to recalculate the first element of the cost base of your
replacement asset if the cost base of the original asset included an amount of indexation
and you're seeking to apply the CGT discount to a capital gain from the replacement asset.



Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                169
   Example 94: asset received
   Jon acquired land after 19 September 1985 which the state government compulsorily
   acquired on 14 July 2024. The cost base of the land at the time it was compulsorily
   acquired was $180,000. As compensation, Jon received another piece of land with a
   market value of $200,000.

   Because the market value of the replacement land was greater than the cost base of
   the original land just before it was compulsorily acquired, Jon disregards the capital
   gain made on the disposal of the original land. Jon is taken to have paid $180,000 to
   acquire the replacement land (that is, the cost base of the original land at the time it
   was compulsorily acquired).


If you receive both money and an asset
If you receive both money and an asset and choose to take a roll-over, the requirements
and consequences are different for each part of the compensation.

You need to separately determine what happens to the replacement asset and the money,
having regard to the proportion of the original asset attributable to each type of
compensation.

The rules are then applied separately to the money and to the asset.


   Example 95: money and an asset received as compensation
   The state government compulsorily acquires land Kris bought in 2004. Its cost base at
   the time was $150,000 but Kris received compensation worth $160,000.

   Half of the total compensation is money ($80,000) and half is replacement land
   (market value $80,000).

   Therefore, the cost base of the original land attributable to each part of the
   compensation is $75,000 (50% × $150,000). Kris bought additional replacement land
   for $82,000.

   The total capital gain is $10,000 which is capital proceeds of cash and property
   totalling $160,000 less the cost base of $150,000. Half of this capital gain can be
   attributed to the money and half to the asset (the replacement land).

   The money Kris received as compensation is less than the amount he paid to buy the
   additional land. He can therefore disregard the $5,000 of the capital gain that is
   attributable to the money compensation. He reduces the expenditure on the additional
   land by $5,000, so the first element of its cost base is only $77,000.

   As the market value of the replacement land is more than that part of the cost base of
   the original land, Kris can choose to take roll-over relief and disregard the capital gain
   of $5,000 relating to the land.

   As a result, the value of the replacement land ($75,000) forms the first element of its
   cost base, not its market value ($80,000) when he acquired it.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                    170
Indexation or CGT discount
If a CGT event happens to the replacement asset (for example, a later disposal), you may be
able to use the indexation method or the discount method to calculate your capital gain.
This applies only if the periods of ownership of the original asset and the replacement asset
add up to at least 12 months. For indexation to apply, you must have acquired the asset
before 11:45 am AEST on 21 September 1999.

Main residence – compulsory acquisition
The main residence exemption can apply to certain compulsory acquisitions (or similar
arrangements) which are associated with your main residence but not with your dwelling.

You can ignore a capital gain or capital loss you make from a compulsory acquisition (or
similar arrangement) that happens only to land that is adjacent to:
•   a dwelling that is your main residence
•   a dwelling that passed to you as a beneficiary or trustee of a deceased estate.

The main residence exemption will apply to the extent that the land was used primarily for
private or domestic purposes in association with the dwelling.

The maximum area of vacant land covered by the exemption is 2 hectares less the area of
land underneath the dwelling.

This applies to CGT events that happen on or after 29 June 2011.

You also have the choice to apply the main residence exemption to CGT events that
happened during the transitional period:
•   starting at the beginning of the 2004–05 income year
•   ending immediately before 29 June 2011.

The main residence exemption applies to structures adjacent to a flat or home unit, such as
a garage or a storeroom, in the same way as it applies to land adjacent to a dwelling.

A partial CGT exemption may apply where the dwelling was:
•   not used as a main residence during all of the relevant ownership period
•   used for income-producing purposes.

For more information, see:
•   Partial exemption
•   Dwelling used to produce income.

The exemption for compulsory acquisitions of part of your main residence can apply to all
the relevant CGT events, which is broader than the CGT events that the ordinary main
residence exemption can apply to.

If you're a foreign resident when a CGT event happens to your residential property in
Australia under a compulsory acquisition arrangement you may no longer be entitled to
claim the main residence exemption.

For more information, see Main residence exemption for foreign residents.



Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                 171
What is compulsory acquisition?
All levels of Australian Government or entities acting on behalf of government can
compulsorily acquire land and associated structures or an interest in land for a public
purpose.

Compulsory acquisition involves your ownership interest in the land being compulsorily
acquired by:
•   an Australian Government agency (that is, by the Australian, a state or a territory
    government or by an authority of the Australian, a state or a territory government)
•   a non-government entity authorised to do so under a power conferred by an Australian
    law.

The acquirer serves a notice on the landowner inviting them to negotiate for the disposal of
the asset or part of the asset. This notice should inform the landowner that if negotiations
are unsuccessful, the acquirer will proceed to acquire the asset or part of the asset in
accordance with its legislative powers. Even if the landowner accepts the initial or
negotiated offer, this is viewed to be a compulsory acquisition. This type of negotiated
disposal is referred to as an acquisition under the shadow of compulsion.

This would typically involve:
•   compulsorily acquiring part of the land adjacent to your residence
•   compulsorily acquiring a structure such as a garage, storeroom or other structure
    associated with your flat or home unit.

Arrangements similar to a compulsory acquisition include the following:
•   Your ownership interest in the land is compulsorily cancelled (however described),
    including compulsorily terminated or revoked.
•   Your ownership interest in the land is varied (however described), for example,
    removing your ownership right to further develop the main residence. It could restrict
    your ability to erect structures above a certain level, for example installing antennas or
    remove your right to dig below the soil inhibiting your ability to undertake any further
    structural development of the property.
•   Your ownership interest in the land is surrendered (however described) or varied
    (however described) under the shadow of compulsion.
•   An interest or right in, or relating to, your land is compulsorily conferred on an Australian
    Government agency or an entity under a power conferred by an Australian law, for
    example, compulsorily creating a right of access over part of land adjacent to your
    dwelling.
•   You confer on an entity an interest in, or right in, or relating to, your land under the
    shadow of compulsion, for example, compulsorily negotiating an agreement in relation
    to a temporary right in relation to your main residence. Government could require
    temporary access through your property to improve property that is used for a public
    purpose.
•   Your ownership interest in the land was conferred on you by an Australian Government
    agency for a limited, but renewable period of operation, and that ownership interest
    wasn't renewed by that agency. For example, a right that you hold over the land isn't
    renewed, such as a Crown lease.

Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                  172
The exemption doesn't apply to compulsory acquisitions, or similar arrangements, of
adjacent land or a structure where the dwelling to which they relate is outside Australia.

   Example 96: full main residence exemption
   Debbie and Geoff live in a 3 bedroom house on a small suburban block that is
   2 hectares. In July 2010, the Department of Main Roads commenced negotiations with
   several home owners in Debbie and Geoff’s neighbourhood to end ownership rights
   over part of the land adjacent to the dwelling. When their ownership rights end, Debbie
   and Geoff along with other home owners wouldn't be able to build on that part of the
   land or conduct any activities on that part of the land.

   The area adjacent to their dwelling on which their ownership right ends is 50 square
   metres (10 metres wide by 5 metres located along the rear boundary)

   They qualify for full main residence exemption because they have lived in the dwelling
   throughout their ownership period. This means Debbie and Geoff would be able to
   apply the main residence exemption to the proceeds they received for the compulsory
   acquisition which ended their ownership rights.


How much will be part of your main residence
If your property exceeds 2 hectares you'll need to determine how much and which parts of
your property will form part of your main residence exemption area.

If the land used for private purposes is greater than 2 hectares, you can choose which
2 hectares are exempt.

   Example 97: land exceeds 2 hectares
   Robyn’s property is 10.35 hectares. She identifies the dwellings, land and associated
   structures that are linked to the main residence and are for private or personal use as a
   total of 1.90 hectares. The driveway is 1500 square metres in area. Adding the
   driveway for personal use makes the adjacent land covered by the exemption greater
   than 2 hectares (2.05 hectares). Robyn decides to exclude 500 square metres of
   driveway to ensure that the total area of the land isn't greater than 2 hectares.



Land exceeds 2 hectares

 Calculation element                                           Hectares   Square metres

 Main residence                                                0.0345     345

 Swimming pool                                                 0.0044     44

 Dam 1 (pump water to landscaped gardens)                      0.3500     3,500

 Garage                                                        0.0100     100

 Guest house                                                   0.0153     153



Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                 173
 Calculation element                                           Hectares   Square metres

 Driveway                                                      0.1000     1,000

 Landscaped gardens                                            1.4857     14,857

 Total                                                         2.00       20,000


Maximum exempt area
Where you have previously disregarded one or more capital gains or losses for a compulsory
acquisition (or similar arrangement) of adjacent land or structure, the maximum area of
adjacent land available for the main residence exemption when the dwelling is eventually
sold (or otherwise realised) is reduced. The reduced area is called the ‘maximum exempt
area’.

However, the maximum exempt area is only reduced by a previous compulsory acquisition
or similar arrangement where you lost rights to the substantial use and enjoyment of that
land either completely or for at least 10 years.

This rule ensures you're not disadvantaged by having to reduce your maximum exempt area
where you have lost only insubstantial rights to the use and enjoyment of the exempt land. It
also ensures that you're not disadvantaged where you lose substantial rights to the use and
enjoyment of the exempt land but only for a short term such as under a short-term lease.
This means that such land will remain eligible for a later application of the main residence
exemption.

Examples of compulsory arrangements that don't result in substantial loss of rights to the
use and enjoyment of the land might include where an easement is granted over vacant land
which still permits the use and enjoyment of the land. Another example might be where the
government compulsorily acquires subsurface land under your main residence. If you didn't
use or enjoy the subsurface land and the compulsory acquisition didn't result in you losing
rights to the substantial use and enjoyment of the surface land, then the maximum exempt
area wouldn't be reduced.

   Example 98: reduction in maximum exempt area
   In January 2007, the government contacted Robyn and advised that they're acquiring
   1.40 hectares of her land for the development of a freeway. Part of this acquisition
   includes the dam and landscaped gardens Robyn had identified as being part of the
   main residence. The area of the acquisition includes 0.40 of a hectare of Robyn’s main
   residence.

   Robyn may choose to apply the main residence capital gains tax exemption to the part
   of the capital proceeds, received for the compulsory acquisition, which relates to the
   0.40 hectares of the land Robyn had recorded as being associated with the main
   residence.

   After the compulsory acquisition Robyn’s property is reduced to 8.95 hectares. The
   dam and part of her landscaped gardens were acquired by the government for the
   freeway. Robyn isn't able to revise the land and structures that are associated with her



Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                  174
     main residence. Her maximum exempt area is reduced by the 0.4 hectares she had
     previously attributed to her main residence that was acquired by the government.



Reduction in maximum exempt area

    Calculation element                            Hectares          Square metres

    Main Residence                                 0.0345            345

    Swimming pool                                  0.0044            44

    Garage                                         0.0100            100

    Guest house                                    0.0153            153

    Driveway                                       0.1000            1,000

    Landscaped gardens                             1.4357            14,357

    Total                                          1.6               16,000


Exemption conditions to be met
Where you satisfy all of the following conditions any capital gain or capital loss arising from
the compulsory acquisition (or similar arrangement) of adjacent land or structure without the
dwelling is automatically disregarded.

The conditions that must be met are:
•      you're an individual
•      the exempt land is all or part of a dwelling’s adjacent land at the time of the CGT event
•      the CGT event doesn't happen in relation to the dwelling or your ownership interest in
       the dwelling
•      one of the following applies
       –     the dwelling was your main residence during some or all of the period you owned it
       –     your ownership interest in the dwelling passed to you as a beneficiary in a deceased
             estate
       –     you own the ownership interest in the dwelling as the trustee of a deceased estate
•      the adjacent land or structure is compulsorily acquired or is the subject of a similar
       compulsory arrangement
•      the sum of the following is 2 hectares or less
       –     the area of all of the dwelling’s adjacent land at the time of the CGT event
       –     the area of land on which the dwelling is built
       –     for each earlier CGT event that resulted in a capital gain or capital loss being
             disregarded under this exemption, the area of adjacent land exempted at the time
             of the earlier CGT event, but only if that involved reducing the area of the dwelling’s
             adjacent land at the time of that earlier CGT event.



Australian Taxation Office    Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                    175
This last condition ensures that you'll not be disadvantaged by double counting of the same
area of land where you haven't lost substantial use and enjoyment of the land, although with
diminished rights. For example, a compulsory easement is created over land but you retain
ownership of the land affected by the easement.

Where you satisfy all of the conditions apart from the last condition (that is, where the sum
of the relevant areas of land is more than 2 hectares), there is no automatic disregarding of
any capital gain or capital loss arising from the compulsory acquisition (or similar
arrangement).

In these circumstances, you can choose to disregard so much of the capital gain or capital
loss that relates to an area of adjacent land that is compulsorily acquired (or subject to a
similar arrangement) that isn't more than the maximum exempt area.

Record keeping requirements
With all assets you need to keep records. In this case, you'll need to keep records of the
transactions or events that provide evidence of your assessment of how the main residence
capital gains tax exemption applies to the part of your main residence that has been
compulsorily acquired. This includes a record of your calculations of your capital gain or loss
and if your property is greater than 2 hectares.

To find out more about the record keeping requirements in relation to assets and capital
gain tax see Keeping CGT records.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                176
Marriage or relationship breakdown
Explains your CGT obligations if your marriage or relationship ended on or
after 20 September 1985.

Overview
Read this section if your marriage or relationship ended on or after 20 September 1985 and
you transfer an asset or a share of an asset to your spouse, you receive an asset or a share
of an asset from your spouse, or a company or trustee of a trust transfers an asset to you or
your spouse.

When we talk about ‘your spouse’, this includes your former spouse. It doesn't include your
spouse's or your former spouse's legal personal representative (such as an executor).

Transfer of an asset means transferring ownership of an asset to the transferee spouse and
includes creating an asset in their favour (such as a right to use property).

Where we talk about an asset, this includes a share of, or an interest in, a jointly owned
asset.

Transferee spouse refers to the spouse to whom an asset is transferred, while the
transferor is the person (or a company or the trustee of a trust) who transfers an asset to
the transferee spouse.

As a general rule, CGT applies to all changes of ownership of assets on or after
20 September 1985. However, if you transfer an asset to your spouse as a result of the
breakdown of your marriage or relationship, there is an automatic roll-over in certain cases.
You can't choose whether or not it applies.

This roll-over ensures the transferor spouse disregards a capital gain or capital loss that
would otherwise arise. In effect, the one who receives the asset (the transferee spouse) will
make the capital gain or capital loss when they subsequently dispose of the asset. If you're
the transferee spouse, the cost base of the asset is transferred to you.

Conditions for the marriage or relationship breakdown roll-over
For the roll-over to apply, the CGT event must have happened because of:
•   an order of a court or court order made by consent under the Family Law Act 1975 or a
    similar law of a foreign country
•   a court order under a state, territory or foreign law relating to breakdown of relationship
    between spouses.

The roll-over also applies to CGT events that happen after 12 December 2006 because of
one of the following:
•   a financial agreement that is binding under section 90G of the Family Law Act 1975
    (known as a ‘binding financial agreement’) or a corresponding written agreement that is
    binding because of a corresponding foreign law
•   an award made in an arbitration referred to in section 13H of the Family Law Act 1975
    (known as an ‘arbitral award’) or a similar award under a corresponding state, territory or
    foreign law

Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                  177
•   a written agreement that is binding because of a state, territory or foreign law relating to
    breakdowns of relationship between spouses and because of such law, a court is
    prevented from making an order either
    –    about matters to which the agreement applies
    –    that is inconsistent with the terms of the agreement for those matters, unless the
         agreement is varied or set aside.

These are referred to below as ‘binding agreements’ used by separating couples. The
following agreements relating to relationship breakdowns meet these requirements:
•   a domestic relationship agreement or termination agreement that complies with
    subsection 47(1) of the New South Wales Property (Relationships) Act 1984
•   a recognised agreement within the meaning of the Queensland Property Law Act 1974
•   a cohabitation agreement that is a certificated agreement within the meaning of the
    South Australian's Domestic Partner Property Act 1996
•   a personal relationship agreement or separation agreement that complies with
    subsection 62(1) of the Tasmanian Relationships Act 2003
•   a financial agreement that complies with subsection 205ZS(1) of the Western Australian
    Family Court Act 1997
•   a domestic relationship agreement or termination agreement that complies with
    subsection 33(1) of the Australian Capital Territory’s Domestic Relationships Act 1994
•   a cohabitation agreement or separation agreement that complies with subsection 45(2)
    of the Northern Territory’s De Facto Relationships Act 1991
•   a relationship agreement that complies with subsections 59(1) and (2) of the Victorian
    Relationships Act 2008 (which came into effect on 1 December 2008).
From 1 March 2009 the roll-over also applies to CGT events that happen because of either
a:
•   financial agreement that is binding because of section 90UJ of the Family Law Act 1975
    (known as a ‘binding financial agreement’)
•   corresponding written agreement that is binding because of a corresponding foreign
    law.

Section 90UJ relates to agreements made between parties to a de facto relationship.

In addition, from 2009–10 the marriage breakdown roll-over was extended to same-sex
couples.

Timing of the CGT event
Because certain changes to the marriage or relationship breakdown roll-over rules apply to
CGT events that happened after 12 December 2006 it is important to know when those
events happened. Appendix 1 contains information about the timing of CGT events.

If an asset was transferred under a contract, the CGT event happened when the contract
was entered into.

A binding financial agreement may be a contract. The time at which a contract is entered
into depends on the terms and conditions of the agreement and the relevant legislation


Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                  178
being satisfied such that the agreement can take effect. In the case of a binding financial
agreement, a separation declaration has to be made under section 90DA of the Family Law
Act 1975 before the agreement can take effect.
A binding agreement used by a marriage or relationship breakdown couple may be a
contract. The time at which a contract was entered into depends on the terms and
conditions of the agreement and the relevant legislation being satisfied such that the
agreement could take effect.

If there is no contract, the CGT event happened when the change of ownership of the asset
occurred.

Transfers made because of a court order or arbitral award aren't made under a contract.
Therefore, no CGT event happened until the asset was transferred under the order or
award.

If the asset was transferred under an agreement to which CGT event B1 (see Appendix 1)
applied, the event happened when use of the asset passed to the transferee spouse.

Binding financial agreements can be entered into before, during or after marriage or
relationship. Arbitral awards allow property and financial matters of separating couples to be
settled using arbitration. These arrangements allow separating couples to settle their affairs
without having to go through court processes, which are often costly and protracted.

Roll-overs that don't require court intervention
For transfers that happen because of a binding financial agreement, or a binding agreement
used by a separating couple, the roll-over only applies if at the time of the transfer all of the
following apply:
•   the spouses involved were separated
•   there is no reasonable likelihood of cohabitation being resumed
•   the transfer happened because of reasons directly connected with the breakdown of
    the marriage or relationship.

The transfer may not be directly connected with the breakdown if, for example:
•   the spouses had an agreement before the breakdown of their marriage or relationship
    stating that the particular property was to be transferred between them for other
    reasons not directly related to the marriage or relationship breakdown
•   the agreement provided for the transfer of non-specific property, the transfer doesn't
    occur for a considerable time (say, more than 12 months) after the agreement, and
    factors are present that suggest the transfer wasn't directly connected to the marriage
    or relationship breakdown.

Relevant CGT events
For the roll-over to apply, one of the following events must have happened. The transferor
either:
•   disposed of an asset to the transferee spouse (CGT event A1)
•   entered into an agreement with the transferee spouse under which
    –    the right to use and enjoy a CGT asset passed to the transferee spouse


Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                  179
    –    title in the asset will or may pass to the transferee spouse at the end of the
         agreement (CGT event B1). There is no roll-over if title in the CGT asset doesn't
         pass to the transferee spouse when the agreement ends
•   created a contractual or other right in favour of the transferee spouse (CGT event D1)
•   granted an option to the transferee spouse or renewed or extended an option granted
    to them (CGT event D2)
•   owned a prospecting or mining entitlement, or an interest in one, and granted the
    transferee spouse a right to receive income from operations carried on by the
    entitlement (CGT event D3)
•   was a lessor and granted, renewed or extended a lease to the transferee spouse (CGT
    event F1).

There is no roll-over for the transfer of trading stock.

Consequences of the roll-over
In this section:
•   You transfer the asset
•   The asset is transferred to you

You transfer the asset
If you transferred the asset, the consequences of the roll-over are:
•   you disregard any capital gain or capital loss for assets acquired before 20 September
    1985
•   for assets acquired on or after 20 September 1985, the marriage or relationship
    breakdown roll-over ensures you disregard any capital gain or capital loss you make
    from the CGT event that involves you and the transferee spouse.

The asset is transferred to you
You'll need to determine the date the asset was acquired before being transferred to you.

Assets acquired before 20 September 1985
If a CGT asset, including a share of a jointly owned asset, was transferred to you because of
the breakdown of your marriage or relationship and it was acquired by the transferor before
20 September 1985, you're also taken to have acquired the asset before that date. You
disregard any capital gain or capital loss you make when you later dispose of the asset.

However, if you made a major capital improvement to that asset after 20 September 1985,
you may be subject to CGT when you dispose of it or another CGT event happens to that
asset.

For more information, see Other capital improvements to pre-CGT assets.

Assets acquired on or after 20 September 1985
The rules are different if the asset was acquired by the transferor on or after 20 September
1985. In this case, if you received the CGT asset (or a share of a jointly owned asset) and


Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                 180
there was a marriage or relationship breakdown roll-over, you're taken to have acquired the
asset (or share of the asset) at the time it was transferred from your spouse (or the
company or trustee).

To calculate your capital gain or capital loss when a later CGT event happened, the first
element of your cost base and reduced cost base are the same as the cost base and
reduced cost base of your spouse (or the company or trustee) at the time of the transfer.
Your cost base and reduced cost base also include any costs incurred by you or the
previous owner (your spouse, the company or trustee) in transferring the particular asset on
the breakdown of your marriage or relationship, such as conveyancing costs and stamp
duty.

General legal costs relating to the breakdown or incurred in seeking a property settlement,
and payments made under a Family Court order representing the increase in value of the
CGT asset, aren't included.

If the transferor’s cost base includes an amount of indexation, you may later have to
recalculate the first element of your cost base to exclude that amount if you want to apply
the CGT discount to your capital gain.

If you acquired the asset from your spouse (or the company or trustee) before 11:45 am
AEST on 21 September 1999, you may be able to use the indexation method when
calculating your capital gain. This can only apply if your and your spouse’s combined period
of ownership is 12 months or more (or your and the company’s or trustee’s combined period
of ownership is 12 months or more).

If you acquired the asset after 11:45 am AEST on 21 September 1999, you can't use the
indexation method when calculating your capital gain but you may be able to use the
discount method. You can use the discount method to calculate your capital gain if your and
your spouse’s combined period of ownership is 12 months or more. If the period is less than
12 months, you use the 'other' method.

Collectables or personal use assets remain collectables or personal use assets when they
are transferred from your spouse (or the company or trustee) in the case of a marriage or
relationship breakdown roll-over.

For information about collectables and personal use assets, see What is a CGT asset?

There are several instances where your spouse (or a company or trustee) may create an
asset in your favour. Table 5 explains how to calculate the first element of your cost base
and reduced cost base of that asset in each case.


Table 5: Calculation of cost base

 CGT event                              First element of cost base and reduced cost base

 Creating contractual or other          Incidental costs incurred by the transferor that relate to the
 rights (D1)                            event

 Granting an option (D2)                Expenditure incurred by the transferor to grant the option

 Granting a right to income from        Expenditure incurred by the transferor to grant the right
 mining (D3)



Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                             181
 CGT event                              First element of cost base and reduced cost base

 Granting a lease (F1)                  Expenditure incurred by the transferor on the grant renewal or
                                        extension of the lease

You're taken to have acquired the asset at the time specified by the CGT event. For
example, for CGT event D1, you acquired the asset at the time you entered into the contract,
or, if there is no contract, at the time the right was created. For more information, see
Appendix 1.

CGT assets transferred by a company or trust
If a company or a trustee of a trust transferred a CGT asset to a spouse, adjustments are
required to the relevant cost base and reduced cost base of interests in the company or
trust. These may have been shares (or indirect interests in shares) in the company, units in a
unit trust and other interests in the trust. They're reduced in value by an amount that
reasonably reflects the fall in their market value as a result of the transfer of the CGT asset.

If the transferor was a controlled foreign corporation or a foreign trust, there are special
rules for working out the capital gain or capital loss for a subsequent CGT event.

Generally, the transfer of an asset from a private company to a spouse who is a shareholder
or an associate of a shareholder is treated as a payment for the purposes of Division 7A of
the Income Tax Assessment Act 1936, which the company may be taken to have paid a
dividend because of that payment.

For more information, see Payments by private companies.


   Example 99: transfer of assets from a marriage or relationship
   Danny and Claudia jointly owned the following assets immediately before their
   marriage breakdown:


   Danny and Claudia's joint assets

    Asset                    When purchased        Cost
                                                   $

    The family home          January 1985          75,000

    Holiday house            December 1988         65,000

    Shares in a company      March 1999            35,000

   After their permanent separation in October 2024, the Family Court approved the
   couple’s agreement and made an appropriate court order by consent.

   Danny transferred his interest in the family home to Claudia in March 2025 under the
   court order. Because it was acquired by the couple before 20 September 1985 and the
   CGT roll-over applied, she is taken to have acquired Danny’s interest in the home
   before that date. Therefore, Claudia won't have to pay tax on any capital gains when



Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                        182
    she sells the home, that is, either on her original interest in the home, or the interest
    Danny transferred to her.

    Danny has no CGT obligation on the transfer to Claudia of his interest in the family
    home.

    Claudia’s interests in the shares and the holiday house were transferred to Danny in
    March 2025 under the court order. The holiday house didn't become his home.

    Although the couple acquired these assets on or after 20 September 1985, Claudia’s
    capital gains from the transfer of her interests in these assets to Danny are
    disregarded under the marriage breakdown roll-over.

    Danny is taken to have acquired Claudia’s interests in these assets at the time of
    transfer for her relevant cost bases. If he were to sell the holiday home or the shares,
    he would separately calculate his capital gain or capital loss in respect of his original
    interest and the interest he acquired from Claudia.

    When he sells the assets, Danny can choose to apply the indexation method or the
    discount method to work out the amount of any capital gain from his original interests
    because they were acquired before 21 September 1999.

    Because he acquired Claudia’s interests after that date, he can only choose the
    discount method to work out any capital gain on them. However, in applying the 12-
    month ownership test for the purposes of the CGT discount, he can take into account
    the period that Claudia owned the interest.

    Danny will have to ensure that the cost bases of the interests he acquired from Claudia
    don't include any amount of indexation.


If these rules apply to you, seek help from us or a recognised tax adviser.

Super interests

Payment splits
A CGT roll-over may apply if an interest in a small super fund is subject to:
•    a payment split on the breakdown of relationship between spouses
•    a CGT asset of a small super fund is transferred to another complying super fund.

A small super fund is one that is a complying fund with no more than 6 members.

Transfer of own interest in a small super fund
A trustee of a small super fund also qualifies for CGT roll-over when the trustee transfers an
asset or assets reflecting the entire personal interest of one of the spouses or former
spouses to the trustee of another complying super fund for the benefit of that spouse. For
the roll-over to apply both spouses must hold an interest in the small super fund before the
transfer. This allows spouses to separate their super arrangements on the breakdown of
their relationship without any CGT liability.

To qualify for a roll-over, the spouses have to be permanently separated at the time of the
transfer, the transfer has to have happened because of reasons directly connected with the


Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                    183
breakdown of the relationship between spouses and, the transfer has to have been made in
accordance with:
•    a court order made under section 79 or subsection 90AE(2) or 90AF(2), section 90SM or
     90YX of the Family Law Act 1975 or a corresponding foreign law
•    a court order made under a state, territory or foreign law relating to breakdowns of
     relationship between spouses that corresponds to an order made under the Family Law
     Act 1975
•    an award made in an arbitration referred to in section 13H of the Family Law Act 1975
     (known as an arbitral award) or a corresponding award made in an arbitration under a
     corresponding state, territory or foreign law
•    a financial agreement that is binding under section 90UJ of the Family Law Act 1975
     (known as a ‘binding financial agreement’) and was made on or after 1 March 2009
•    a financial agreement that is binding under section 90G of the Family Law Act 1975
     (known as a ‘binding financial agreement’) or a corresponding written agreement that is
     binding because of a corresponding foreign law
•    a written agreement that is binding because of a state, territory or foreign law relating to
     breakdowns of relationship between spouses and, that because of such a law, a court is
     prevented from making an order about matters to which the agreement applies, or that
     is inconsistent with the terms of the agreement for those matters, unless the agreement
     is varied or set aside.

Once the trustee has obtained a CGT roll-over for such a transfer, the roll-over is no longer
available for a transfer of any asset reflecting the personal super interest of the other
spouse if that later transfer arises out of the same marriage or relationship breakdown.

    Example 100: transfer of super interest
    Danny and Claudia each have a personal interest in a small super fund. They reach a
    binding financial agreement on marriage breakdown, which provides that the trustee
    transfer all of the assets reflecting Danny’s personal interest to another complying
    super fund. The assets reflecting Danny’s personal interest consist of a parcel of
    shares and a rental property.

    A CGT roll-over will apply to the transfer. Consequently, no roll-over will then be
    available to the trustee for any transfer for the benefit of Claudia.


The consequences of the roll-over for the transfer of a super interest are the same as for
the transfer of other assets between spouses as a result of a marriage or relationship
breakdown.

Cash settlements
Changes to the law ensure that no CGT liability arises in relation to the ending of spouses’
rights that directly relate to the breakdown of their marriage or relationship, including if they
receive cash as part of a breakdown settlement. No CGT liability arises if, at the time the
rights end, the spouses were separated and there was no reasonable likelihood of
cohabitation being resumed.



Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                  184
Real estate that was a main residence
You'll need to determine the date the CGT event happened.

Transfers where the CGT event happened on or before 12 December 2006
You're entitled to an exemption from CGT on a dwelling (when you dispose of it) for the
period it was your main residence after it was transferred to you, if all of the following apply:
•   the dwelling was acquired by your spouse on or after 20 September 1985
•   the dwelling was transferred to you under a CGT event that happened on or before
    12 December 2006
•   a marriage or relationship breakdown roll-over applies.

If the dwelling was your main residence, you may only qualify for a partial exemption if one
of the following applies:
•   it was your main residence for only part of the period after it was transferred to you
•   you used the dwelling to produce assessable income
•   the land on which the dwelling is situated is more than 2 hectares.

Keep all relevant records. Make sure you get any records you need from your spouse if you
don’t already have a copy, including records that show:
•   how and when they acquired the dwelling (or the interest in a dwelling)
•   its cost base when they transferred it to you.

For more information, see Real estate and main residence.

Transfers where the CGT event happened after 12 December 2006
You take into account the way in which you and your spouse used a dwelling (or an interest
in a dwelling) during your combined period of ownership, when determining your eligibility
for the main residence exemption if the following apply:
•   the dwelling was acquired by your spouse on or after 20 September 1985
•   the dwelling was transferred to you under a CGT event that happened after
    12 December 2006
•   the marriage or relationship breakdown roll-over applies.

This means you're entitled to a full exemption from CGT (when you dispose of it) if the land
on which the dwelling is situated is 2 hectares or less, and both of the following apply:
•   during the period your spouse owned the dwelling, it was their main residence and
    wasn't being used by them to produce assessable income
•   during the period you owned the dwelling, it was your main residence and wasn't being
    used by you to produce assessable income.

If any of these conditions aren't met, you may qualify for a partial exemption.

If the dwelling wasn't your or your spouse’s main residence during all of your combined
period of ownership, you work out the proportion of your capital gain that is taxable using
the formula:


Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                  185
    A × (B + C) ÷ D

Where:
•    A is total capital gain or capital loss
•    B is number of days it wasn't your spouse's main residence during their ownership
     period
•    C is number of days it wasn't your main residence during your ownership period
•    D is number of days in your combined period of ownership.

For more information, see Real estate and main residence.

Keep all relevant records. Make sure you get any records you need from your spouse if you
don’t already have a copy, including records that show:
•    how and when they acquired the dwelling (or the interest in a dwelling)
•    its cost base when they transferred it to you
•    the extent (if any) to which it was used to produce income during their ownership period
     (for example, the periods when it was rented out or available for rent) and the
     proportion of the dwelling that was used for that purpose
•    the number of days (if any) it was their main residence during their ownership period.

    Example 101: dwelling transferred to you under a CGT event that happened after
    12 December 2006 becomes your home
    George and Natalie jointly purchased a holiday home on 0.1 hectare of land. Settlement
    of the purchase contract happened on 13 March 2020. On 13 March 2022, George
    transferred his half-interest to Natalie under the terms of an arbitral award.

    Natalie uses the dwelling as her main residence for 3 years after the date of the CGT
    event until she sells it. Settlement of the sale contract happens on 13 March 2025.

    Because the dwelling was Natalie’s main residence for 3 years out of the 5 years she
    owned her original interest, she is entitled to a 60% main residence exemption on that
    interest.

    Because George’s half interest in the dwelling was transferred to Natalie under a CGT
    event that happened after 12 December 2006 and CGT marriage or relationship
    breakdown roll-over applied, Natalie is also entitled to a 60% main residence
    exemption on that half interest (having regard to how they both used that interest
    during their combined period of ownership).

    In working out the cost base of the interest George transferred to her, Natalie adds
    any relevant costs she incurred after George transferred it to her to the cost base of
    his interest at the time of the transfer.


Home first used to produce income rule applies to combined period of ownership
If a dwelling acquired on or after 20 September 1985 is used as a main residence from the
time it is acquired and is later used to produce income, the ‘home first used to produce
income’ rule may apply. For the rule to apply, the first income-producing use must be after



Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                  186
20 August 1996 and the dwelling must qualify for full main residence exemption immediately
prior to it being used to produce income. See Home first used to produce income.

If the dwelling (or an interest in the dwelling) is transferred to you under a CGT event that
happened after 12 December 2006 and the marriage or relationship breakdown roll-over
applies to the transfer, the CGT main residence exemption rules take into account the way
you and your spouse use the dwelling during your combined period of ownership.

Where the ‘home first used to produce income’ rule and the marriage or relationship
breakdown roll-over apply and the dwelling (or an interest in the dwelling) was transferred
to you by your spouse, you're taken to have acquired it at the time it is first used to produce
income for its market value at that time. The first income-producing use may be during your
or your spouse’s ownership period.

   Example 102: home transferred under a CGT event that happens after 12 December
   2006 and the ‘first used to produce income’ rule applies
   Harry bought a house on 0.2 hectare of land for $200,000 on 17 November 2001. It
   was his main residence and wasn't used by him to produce income.

   On 1 June 2019, he and Anita started living together as spouses. Harry moved into
   Anita’s townhouse and rented out the house. The house was valued at $250,000 at the
   time.

   Harry and Anita had one child before their relationship broke down in 2023. Harry gave
   notice to the tenants that the lease on the house wouldn’t be renewed.

   On 1 June 2024, Anita moved into the house with their child. Under a binding
   agreement entered into on the same day, Harry transferred the house to Anita. A CGT
   roll-over applied. (Anita also transferred her townhouse to Harry under the agreement.)

   Anita is taken to have acquired the house on 1 June 2019 for the market value at that
   time ($250,000) because it was first used to produce income at that time. The
   following facts are relevant in determining eligibility for the main residence exemption
   in this example:
   •   Harry acquired the house after 19 September 1985
   •   it was his main residence from the time he became the owner
   •   the house was first rented out after 20 August 1996
   •   the CGT event under which the house was transferred to Anita happened after
       12 December 2006 and a CGT roll-over applied
   •   Anita would be entitled to a partial main residence exemption on the sale of the
       house
   •   Harry would have obtained a full main residence exemption had he sold it just
       before he began renting it out on 1 June 2019.

   If Anita sells the house under a contract that is settled on 1 June 2029 and it is her
   main residence until that time, she would obtain a 50% exemption, because it would
   have been her main residence for 5 years (1 June 2024 to 1 June 2029) out of the
   10 years after she is taken to have acquired it.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                  187
Choices made under the CGT main residence rules
In certain circumstances, you may choose to treat a dwelling as your main residence for a
period, even though you no longer live in it, see Continuing main residence status after
dwelling ceases to be your main residence or you're yet to live in it, see Constructing,
renovating or repairing a dwelling on land you already own.

Such choices aren't required to be made by a transferor spouse where a roll-over applies
because the capital gain or capital loss is disregarded. However, there is nothing to prevent
the transferor spouse making a choice (for example, as part of the negotiations with the
transferee spouse and transferee spouse’s advisers about the transfer of a dwelling or an
interest in a dwelling).

If there was a period when the transferor spouse and transferee spouse had different main
residences before they separated, they need to make a choice to either:
•    treat one of the dwellings as the main residence of both of them for the period
•    nominate the different dwellings as their main residences (and obtain a partial
     exemption on both).

Choices relating to the main residence exemption generally need to be made by the day the
person lodges their tax return for the income year they transfer or enter into the contract to
sell the dwelling (or their interest in it) or another CGT event happens to it. In most cases,
the way in which the tax return is prepared is sufficient evidence of that choice.

For the practical reasons of negotiating a property settlement, any choices the transferor
spouse decides to make would generally be expected to be made before they transfer the
dwelling (or their interest in it) to the transferee spouse.

A signed statement could be provided by the transferor spouse to the transferee spouse at
the time of the property settlement as evidence of the making of a choice. Such a statement
would be evidence that the transferee spouse could use to support the calculation of any
capital gain or capital loss they make when the dwelling is later disposed of or another CGT
event happens to the dwelling.

For more information, see Choices.

    Example 103: choice made by transferor spouse to treat dwelling as their main
    residence
    At the time of negotiating their property settlement on the breakdown of their marriage
    in 2025, Calvin and Denise discuss with their advisers how to divide their joint assets.

    When she was single, Denise had purchased a townhouse under a contract that was
    settled on 1 August 2000. She lived in it for 3 years.

    On 14 August 2003, Denise and Calvin rented a flat and started living together as
    spouses. At that time, Denise began renting out her townhouse. After living together
    for 2 years in the flat, Denise and Calvin bought a house. They moved in on
    25 September 2005, the date of settlement of the purchase contract.

    Denise continued to rent out the townhouse.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                188
   In 2025, their relationship broke down. Denise and Calvin decided that Calvin would
   transfer his half share in the house to Denise (where she and their daughter would
   continue to live) and she would transfer the townhouse to Calvin (for him to live in)
   under a binding financial agreement.

   Because the townhouse had been Denise’s main residence, she could choose to
   continue to treat it as such for up to 6 years of any period of absence.

   In negotiating their binding financial agreement, Denise provided Calvin with a signed
   statement which indicated she had chosen to treat the townhouse as her main
   residence for the 2 years between the time she moved out and the time they bought
   the house together.

   Because the ‘home first used to produce income’ rule applies, Calvin is taken to have
   acquired the townhouse for its market value on 14 August 2003 and will qualify for a
   partial main residence exemption when he sells it. (The period from 2000 to 2003 is
   ignored from their combined period of ownership.)

   The effect of Denise’s choice is that the townhouse is exempt from CGT for the period
   between 14 August 2003 (when she moved out) and 25 September 2005 (when she
   and Calvin bought the house together). When Calvin sells it, he will get an exemption
   for that period as well as for the period he lived in it after the marriage broke down.

   If Denise hadn't made the choice, Calvin wouldn't get the exemption for the period
   from 14 August 2003 to 25 September 2005.


Dwellings transferred from a company or the trustee of a trust
If a dwelling (or an interest in a dwelling) was transferred to you from a company or trustee
of a trust, and the marriage or relationship breakdown roll-over applies to the transfer,
you're treated as having owned the dwelling while it was owned by the company or trustee.
However, you can't get the main residence exemption during any part of the period that the
company or trustee owned it (even if you lived in the dwelling during that time).

Therefore, if a dwelling is transferred to you by a company or trustee as a result of your
marriage or relationship breakdown, you'll be entitled to the exemption only for the period
after it was transferred when it was your main residence. You work out the proportion of
your capital gain or capital loss that is exempt by dividing the period after the transfer that it
was your main residence by the combined period you and the company or trustee owned it.

For more information, see Real estate and main residence.

Consequences of the roll-over not applying
If you and your spouse divide your property under a private or informal agreement (not
because of a court order, a binding financial agreement, an arbitral award or another
agreement or award referred to above), the marriage or relationship breakdown roll-over
doesn't apply.

If this is the case, you must take any capital gain or capital loss you make on the transfer of
the asset into account in working out your net capital gain (or net capital losses carried
forward to future years) in your tax return for that income year.



Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                   189
The spouse to whom the asset is transferred is taken to have acquired the asset at the time
of transfer.

Special rules may apply if a spouse receiving property doesn't pay anything for it, or if the
amount paid by one spouse for property owned by the other is greater or less than the
market value of the property and they aren't dealing at arm’s length. In these cases, the
transferee is taken to have paid the market value of the property and the transferor is taken
to have received the market value of the property.

You're said to be dealing at arm’s length with someone if each of you acts independently
and neither of you exercises influence or control over the other in connection with the
transaction. It depends not only on the nature of your relationship but also the quality of the
bargaining between you.


   Example 104: roll-over doesn't apply
   Laurie and Jennie separated after living in a relationship for 4 years. To avoid legal
   costs, they decided that they would divide their assets without involving solicitors.

   During their relationship they had occupied a townhouse owned by Laurie. As part of
   their informal arrangement, they decided Laurie would keep it. They owned separate
   household items and decided each of them would keep whatever they had bought.

   They also agreed that Laurie would transfer his half share of their rental property to
   Jennie in return for $6,000. Under the arrangement, Jennie would also become liable
   for the whole of the mortgage after the date of transfer.

   Little or no bargaining took place between Laurie and Jennie and no other assets were
   transferred.

   Jennie is taken to have paid the market value of Laurie’s share of the rental property.
   (The $6,000 she actually paid and the mortgage liability she assumed from Laurie are
   ignored.) This is because:
   •   a CGT roll-over didn't apply (as the transfer didn't happen because of a court
       order or a relevant agreement or award)
   •   Jennie and Laurie didn't deal with each other at arm’s length in connection with the
       transfer.

   Laurie is taken to have received the market value of his share of the rental property at
   the time it was transferred to Jennie. This means, in working out his net capital gain for
   the income year he transferred the property to Jennie, he takes into account a capital
   gain or capital loss, based on the market value of his half share at that time.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                 190
Deceased estates
Rules that apply if you're a deceased person’s legal personal representative or
a beneficiary of a deceased estate.

CGT and deceased estates
When a person dies, the assets that make up their estate can either:
•   pass directly to a beneficiary (or beneficiaries)
•   pass directly to their legal personal representative (for example, their executor) who
    may dispose of the assets or pass them to the beneficiary (or beneficiaries).

A beneficiary is a person entitled to assets of a deceased estate. They can be named as a
beneficiary in a will or they can be entitled to the assets as a result of the laws of intestacy
(when a person dies without having made a will).

A legal personal representative can be either:
•   the executor of a deceased estate (that is, a person appointed to wind up the estate in
    accordance with the will)
•   an administrator appointed to wind up the estate if the person doesn't leave a will.

Capital gain or capital loss on death is disregarded
There is a general rule that CGT applies to any change of ownership of a CGT asset, unless
the asset was acquired before 20 September 1985 (pre-CGT).

There is a special rule that allows any capital gain or capital loss made on a post-CGT asset
to be disregarded. It will be disregarded if, when a person dies, an asset they owned
passes:
•   to their legal personal representative or to a beneficiary
•   from their legal personal representative to a beneficiary.

Exceptions to this rule
A capital gain or capital loss isn't disregarded if a post-CGT asset owned at the time of
death passes from the deceased to a tax-advantaged entity or to a foreign resident. In
these cases, a CGT event is taken to have happened to the asset just before the person
died. The CGT event results in:
•   a capital gain if the market value of the asset on the day the person died was more than
    the cost base of the asset
•   a capital loss if the market value was less than the asset’s reduced cost base.

These capital gains and capital losses should be taken into account in the deceased
person’s ‘date of death tax return’. The date of death tax return is for the period from the
start of the income year to the date of the person’s death.

However, any capital gain or capital loss from a testamentary gift of property can be
disregarded if:



Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                   191
•   the gift was made to a deductible gift recipient
•   the gift would have been income tax deductible if it hadn't been a testamentary gift.

The condition that testamentary gifts of property must be valued at greater than $5,000
before the CGT exemption applies doesn't apply to gifts made on or after 1 July 2005.

Tax-advantaged entity
A tax-advantaged entity is one of the following:
•   a tax-exempt entity, for example, a church or charity
•   the trustee of either
    –    a complying super fund
    –    a complying approved deposit fund
    –    a pooled super trust
•   a foreign resident.

Foreign resident beneficiary
If a foreign resident is a beneficiary of a deceased’s post CGT asset, any capital gain or
capital loss is taken into account in preparing the deceased person’s date of death tax
return if:
•   the deceased was an Australian resident when they died
•   the asset isn't taxable Australian property in the hands of the beneficiary.

Assets which pass to the beneficiary or legal personal representative

Main residence
Special rules apply if the asset was the deceased person’s or beneficiary’s main residence,
see Inherited main residence and Flowchart 3.6 in Appendix 3.

Other real estate
Even if the property wasn't the deceased person’s main residence, special rules may mean
you qualify for a full or partial exemption when you dispose of it, see Inherited main
residence and Flowchart 3.6 in Appendix 3.

Other assets
In administering and winding up a deceased estate, a legal personal representative may
need to dispose of some or all of the assets of the estate. Assets disposed of in this way are
subject to the normal rules and any capital gain the legal personal representative makes on
the disposal is subject to CGT.

Similarly, it may be necessary for the legal personal representative to acquire an asset (for
example, to satisfy a specific legacy made). Any capital gain or capital loss they make on
disposal of that asset to the beneficiary is subject to the normal CGT rules.

If a beneficiary sells an asset they have inherited, the normal CGT rules also apply.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                 192
Acquisition of asset
If you acquire an asset owned by a deceased person as their legal personal representative
or beneficiary, you're taken to have acquired the asset on the day the person died. If that
was before 20 September 1985, you disregard any capital gain or capital loss you make
from the asset.

Cost base of asset
Assets acquired by the deceased person before 20 September 1985

If the deceased person acquired their asset before 20 September 1985, the first element of
your cost base and reduced cost base (that is, the amount taken to have been paid for the
asset) is the market value of the asset on the day the person died.

If, before they died, a person made a major improvement to a pre-CGT asset on or after
20 September 1985, the improvement isn't treated as a separate asset by the legal personal
representative or beneficiary. They're taken to have acquired a single asset. The cost base
of this asset, when the legal personal representative or beneficiary acquires it, is equal to
the market value of the asset (including the improvement) on the day the person died.

Assets acquired by the deceased person on or after 20 September 1985

If a deceased person acquired their asset on or after 20 September 1985, the first element
of your cost base and reduced cost base is taken to be the deceased person’s cost base
and reduced cost base of the asset on the day the person died.

There is an exception if the asset is a dwelling and certain conditions are met. See Cost to
you of acquiring the dwelling.

If the deceased person died before 21 September 1999, and you choose the indexation
method to work out the capital gain when you dispose of the asset (or when another CGT
event happens), you index the first element of the cost base from the date the deceased
person acquired it up until 21 September 1999.

If the deceased person died on or after 21 September 1999, you can't use the indexation
method and, when you dispose of the asset, you must recalculate the first element of your
cost base to leave out any indexation that was included in the deceased’s cost base.

If you're the trustee of a Special Disability Trust, the first element of your cost base and
reduced cost base is the market value of the asset on the day the person died.

Expenditure incurred by a legal personal representative
As a beneficiary, you can include in your cost base (and reduced cost base) any expenditure
the legal personal representative (for example, the executor) would have been able to
include in their cost base if they had sold the asset instead of distributing it to you. You can
include the expenditure on the date they incurred it.

For example, if an executor incurs costs in confirming the validity of the deceased’s will,
these costs form part of the cost base of the estate’s assets.

   Example 105: transfer of an asset from the executor to a beneficiary




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                   193
    Maria died on 13 October 2002, leaving 2 assets, both acquired after 19 September
    1985: a parcel of 2,000 shares in Bounderby Ltd and a vacant block of land. Giovanni
    was appointed executor of the estate (the legal personal representative).

    When the assets are transferred to Giovanni as legal personal representative, he
    disregards any capital gain or capital loss. Giovanni disposes of (sells) the shares to
    pay Maria’s outstanding debts. As the shares aren't transferred to a beneficiary, any
    capital gain or capital loss on this disposal must be included on the tax return for
    Maria’s deceased estate.

    When all debts and tax have been paid, Giovanni transfers the land to Maria’s
    beneficiary, Antonio, and pays the conveyancing fee of $5,000. As the land is
    transferred to a beneficiary, any capital gain or capital loss to date is disregarded. The
    first element of Antonio’s cost base is taken as Maria’s cost base on the date of her
    death. Antonio is also entitled to include in his cost base the $5,000 Giovanni spent on
    the conveyancing.


Choosing the indexation method or the discount method
If the deceased person died before 11:45 am AEST on 21 September 1999 and you dispose
of the asset (as legal personal representative or beneficiary) after that date, there are 2
ways of calculating your capital gain. You can use either the indexation method or the
discount method, whichever gives you the better result. However, the CGT discount is only
available if you're an individual, a trust or a complying super entity.

Elements of an asset’s cost base can be indexed only if you own the asset for at least
12 months before disposing of it. For the purposes of this 12-month ownership test you're
taken to have acquired the asset when the deceased acquired it, not from the date of their
death.

For the CGT discount to apply, you must have acquired the asset at least 12 months before
disposing of it. For the purposes of this 12-month ownership test, you're taken to have
acquired the asset at one of the following times:
•    for pre-CGT assets, the date the deceased died
•    for post-CGT assets, the date the deceased acquired it.

    Example 106: indexation and CGT discount
    Leonard acquired a property on 14 November 1998 for $126,000. He died on 6 August
    1999 and left the property to Gladys. She sold the property on 6 July 2024 for
    $240,000. The property wasn't the main residence of either Leonard or Gladys.

    Although Gladys acquired the property on 6 August 1999, for the purpose of
    determining whether she had owned the property for at least 12 months, she was
    taken to have acquired it on 14 November 1998 (the day Leonard acquired it).

    At the time of disposal, Gladys had owned the property for more than 12 months. As
    she is taken to have acquired it before 11:45 am AEST on 21 September 1999 and
    disposed of it after that date, Gladys could choose to index the cost base. However, if




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                     194
   the discount method would give her a better result, she could choose to claim the CGT
   discount.

   If Gladys chooses the discount method she would have to exclude from the first
   element of her cost base the amount that represented the indexation that had accrued
   to Leonard up until the time he died.


If you're a foreign or temporary resident and taxable Australian property passes to you from
the deceased, you may not be able to apply the CGT discount if you're taken to have
acquired the asset after 8 May 2012.

For more information, see CGT discount for foreign residents.

Collectables and personal use assets
A post-CGT collectable or personal use asset is still treated as such when you receive it as a
beneficiary or the legal personal representative of the estate.

Joint tenants
If 2 or more people acquire a property asset together, it can be either as tenants in common
or as joint tenants.

If a tenant in common dies, their interest in the property is an asset of their deceased estate.
This means it can be transferred only to a beneficiary of the estate or be sold (or otherwise
dealt with) by the legal personal representative of the estate.

If one of the joint tenants dies, their interest in the property passes to the surviving joint
tenants. It isn't an asset of the deceased estate.

For CGT purposes, if you're a joint tenant you're treated as if you're a tenant in common
owning equal shares in the asset. However, if you're a joint tenant and another joint tenant
dies, on that date their interest in the asset is taken to pass in equal shares to you and any
other surviving joint tenants, as if their interest is an asset of their deceased estate and
you're beneficiaries.

This means that if the dwelling was the deceased’s main residence, you may be entitled to
the main residence exemption (see Inherited main residence) for the interest you acquired
from them.

If the joint tenant who dies acquired their interest in the asset on or after 20 September
1985, the first element of the cost base of the interest you acquire from them is the cost
base of their interest on the day they died, divided by the number of joint tenants (including
you) who acquire it. The first element of the reduced cost base of the interest you acquire
from them is worked out similarly.


   Example 107: surviving joint tenants
   In 2001, Ming and Lee buy a residential property for $250,000 as joint tenants. Each
   one is taken to have a 50% interest in it. On 1 May 2003, Lee dies.

   On 1 May 2003, Ming is taken to have acquired Lee’s interest for an amount equal to
   Lee’s cost base on that day.



Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                     195
   If Ming uses the property as his main residence after Lee dies, he may be entitled to
   the main residence exemption for the interest he acquired from Lee as well as for his
   original interest.


If the joint tenant who dies acquired their interest in the asset before 20 September 1985,
the first element of the cost base of the interest you acquire from them is the market value
of their interest on the day they died, divided by the number of joint tenants (including you)
who acquire it. The first element of the reduced cost base of the interest you acquire from
them is worked out similarly.

For the indexation and discount methods to apply, you must have owned the asset (or your
share of it) for at least 12 months. As a surviving joint tenant, for the purposes of this 12-
month test, you're taken to have acquired the deceased’s interest in the asset (or your share
of it) at the time the deceased person acquired it.


   Example 108: CGT and joint tenants
   Trevor and Kylie acquired land as joint tenants before 20 September 1985. Trevor died
   in October 2013. For CGT purposes, Kylie is taken to have acquired Trevor’s interest in
   the land at its market value at the date of his death.

   Kylie holds her original 50% interest as a pre-CGT asset, and the inherited 50% interest
   as a post-CGT asset which she is taken to have acquired at its market value at the
   date of Trevor’s death.

   If Kylie sold the land within 12 months of Trevor’s death, she would qualify for the CGT
   discount on any capital gain she makes on her post-CGT interest. She qualifies for the
   CGT discount because, for the purposes of the 12-month ownership test, she is taken
   to have acquired Trevor’s interest at the time he acquired it, which was before
   20 September 1985.


Unapplied net capital losses
If the deceased had any unapplied net capital losses when they died, these can't be passed
on to you as the beneficiary or legal personal representative for you to offset against any
net capital gains.

Life and remainder interests
There may be CGT consequences on the creation, surrender, expiry or disposal of a life
interest or remainder interest.

For more information, see Taxation Ruling TR 2006/14 Income tax: capital gains tax:
consequences of creating life and remainder interests in property and of later events
affecting those interests.

Trustee choice to be assessed on capital gains
The trustee of a resident trust may choose (if permitted by the trust deed) to be assessed
on a capital gain of the trust. This is allowed provided no beneficiary has received any



Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                  196
amount referable to the gain during 2025–26 or within 2 months of the end of 2025-26
income year. The choice must be made in respect of the whole capital gain.

This is similar to (and replaced) the choice available to the trustee of a testamentary trust
under the law prior to the 2010–11 amendments but isn't limited to those trustees. Under the
previous law (that applied from 2005–06) the trustee of a resident testamentary trust could
choose to be assessed on the capital gains for an income year which would otherwise be
assessed to an income beneficiary (or the trustee on their behalf).

The trustee will be able to make the choice if, for example, under the terms of the trust the
income beneficiary can't benefit from the capital gains. Only the trustee can make this
choice.

If the trustee makes a choice in respect of a capital gain then:
•    the trustee will be assessed on the capital gain under section 99 or 99A, as appropriate
•    the capital gain isn't taken into account in working out any beneficiary's net capital gain
     for 2025–26.

    Example 109: trustee choice to be assessed
    Marcia is entitled to all the income of a resident trust for the duration of her life. Under
    the terms of the trust deed, the trust would be wound up on her death and the corpus
    distributed to Trevor.

    While Marcia is alive, the trustee disposes of some shares in the trust and makes a
    capital gain. Marcia isn't entitled under the terms of the trust to receive the proceeds
    from the disposal of the shares as Trevor is the capital beneficiary.

    As the capital gain is included in the net income of the trust for tax purposes, Marcia
    may be assessed on her share of the capital gain even though she isn't entitled to
    benefit from the gain. The trustee can make a choice to be assessed on the share of
    the capital gain that would otherwise be assessed to Marcia.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                       197
Earnout and deferred consideration arrangements
Explains what earnout and deferred consideration arrangements are.

Earnout and deferred consideration
Earnout and deferred consideration arrangements are often employed as a way of
structuring the sale of a business (including business assets or an interest in an entity
carrying on a business) to deal with uncertainty about its value. They create a contingent
right to a future payment (or other financial benefit) that is unascertainable at the time the
right is created.

Often the sale contract provides for:
•   an initial lump sum payment by the buyer
•   a right to subsequent financial benefits that are contingent on satisfying conditions
    about the performance of the business, market prices, or meeting certain milestones.

In a standard earnout or deferred consideration arrangement, the buyer agrees to pay the
seller additional amounts if the relevant conditions are met. The seller holds the contractual
right.

In a reverse earnout or deferred consideration arrangement, the seller agrees to pay
amounts to the buyer if the relevant conditions aren't met. The buyer holds the contractual
right.

Some earnout and deferred consideration arrangements combine the features of both a
standard arrangement and a reverse arrangement as both the buyer and seller may be
obligated to provide financial benefits which are dependent on contingencies.

Legislation that became law on 25 February 2016 provides for look-through CGT treatment
of certain earnout arrangements entered into on or after 24 April 2015. Under the look-
through CGT treatment in Subdivision 118-I, capital gains or losses associated with look-
through earnout rights are disregarded, and the financial benefits of the arrangement are
instead applied to the capital proceeds or cost base of the underlying asset.

The tax considerations for earnouts and deferred consideration arrangements outlined in
this section are general in nature and may not be relevant to all sale transactions that
include earnout or deferred consideration arrangements. This section doesn't address
arrangements such as a discount for prompt payment, the provision by the seller of an
indemnity, warranty, or guarantee or financing arrangements which result in an equity
interest being issued by an entity. The tax outcomes for such transactions will be dictated
by the nature of the rights in question and the circumstances of the wider transaction of
which they form part.

Look-through earnout rights
Look-through CGT treatment applies to a contractual right to future financial benefits
created under an earnout or deferred consideration arrangement if all of the following apply:
•   the contractual right was created on or after 24 April 2015




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                 198
•   the contractual right is a right to future financial benefits that aren't reasonably
    ascertainable at the time the right is created
•   the right was created under an arrangement involving the disposal of a CGT asset
•   the disposal caused CGT event A1 to happen
•   just before the CGT event, the CGT asset was an active asset of the entity which
    disposed of the asset
•   all of the financial benefits under the right are to be provided within 5 years after the
    end of the income year in which the CGT event happened
•   the financial benefits must be contingent on the economic performance of the CGT
    asset or a business for which it is expected that the CGT asset be an active asset for
    the period to which those financial benefits relate
•   the value of those financial benefits reasonably relates to that economic performance
•   the parties to the arrangement deal with each other at arm's length in making the
    arrangement.

Under the look-through CGT treatment:
•   the capital gains or losses in respect of look-through earnout rights are disregarded
•   for the buyer, any financial benefit provided (or received) under a look-through earnout
    right increase (or decrease) the cost base and the reduced cost base of the underlying
    asset
•   for the seller, any financial benefit received (or provided) under the look-through
    earnout right increase (or decrease) the capital proceeds from the disposal of the
    underlying asset
•   capital losses arising from the disposal of assets to which look-through earnout rights
    relate are temporarily disregarded until and to the extent that they become certain, that
    is, the capital losses couldn't be further reduced by you receiving one or more financial
    benefits. Once the losses become certain, they're available from the income year in
    which they were originally incurred, and not when the amount of the losses became
    certain.

Where an earnout or deferred consideration arrangement doesn't satisfy the above
conditions, the contractual right or rights created under the arrangement are considered
separate CGT assets.

Taxpayers who are subject to the Taxation of Financial Arrangement (TOFA) provisions in
Division 230 of the ITAA 1997 should consider whether their earnout or deferred
consideration arrangement is a 'financial arrangement' subject to those provisions. Earnout
and deferred consideration arrangements contingent on the economic performance of the
relevant business are generally excluded from the TOFA provisions. However, the TOFA
provisions may apply to certain types of earnout or deferred consideration arrangements.
Where the TOFA provisions apply to an earnout or deferred consideration arrangement that
also satisfies the definition of a look-through earnout right in Subdivision 118-I, TOFA will
apply in priority to look-through CGT treatment.

For more information, see Guide to taxation of financial arrangements (TOFA).




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                    199
If you have an earnout arrangement that doesn't satisfy the requirements for look-through
treatment under Subdivision 118-I or TOFA treatment under Division 230 of the ITAA 1997,
and you're unsure of the tax treatment of your arrangement, you can request an early
engagement discussion or seek a ruling.


   Example 110: the look-through CGT treatment
   This example doesn't consider any other CGT concessions that may be available.

   A business is sold on the following terms:
   •       the buyer agrees to pay an initial upfront amount of $800,000
   •       the buyer agrees to pay the seller 50% of the revenue above $500,000 per annum
           for the next 3 income years.

   The market value of the earnout rights at the time of the contract is $300,000 in total.

   Revenue for the business in the following 3 income years is $700,000, $800,000 and
   $700,000. Therefore, the buyer makes additional payments of $100,000, $150,000
   and $100,000 to the seller.

   The following assumptions are made:
   •       the seller's cost base for the business is $700,000
   •       all the conditions of a look-through earnout right are met
   •       the seller has no capital losses brought forward from prior years
   •       the seller isn't eligible for any CGT discount
   •       no other expenditure has been incurred
   •       the TOFA rules don't apply to the seller or buyer.


   Outcomes for the seller and buyer

       Year   Seller                                              Buyer

       0      CGT event A1 happens. The seller's capital          The buyer acquires an asset with a
              proceeds are $800,000. The cost base is             cost base of $800,000.
              $700,000. The capital gain is $100,000.



       1      Financial benefits of $100,000 received.            The buyer provides financial
              Increase Year 0 capital proceeds by $100,000 to     benefits of $100,000. The buyer's
              $900,000, which results in a revised capital gain   cost base is increased to
              or $200,000.                                        $900,000.

       2      Financial benefits of $150,000 received.            The buyer provides financial
              Increase Year 0 capital proceeds by $150,000 to     benefits of $150,000. The buyer's
              $1,050,000, which results in a revised capital      cost base is increased to
              gain of $350,000.                                   $1,050,000.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                           200
       3      Financial benefits of $100,000 received.          The buyer provides financial
              Increase Year 0 capital proceeds by $100,000 to   benefits of $100,000. The buyer's
              $1,150,000, which results in a revised capital    cost base is increased to
              gain of $450,000.                                 $1,150,000.

   Under the look-through CGT treatment:
   •       a valuation of the earnout rights isn't required
   •       the CGT consequences for the seller is reported and assessed when the financial
           benefits are received or provided.
   •       the cost base of the buyer reflects the financial benefits provided by the buyer,
           including the benefits provided under the earnout arrangement.


Amendments
To apply look-through CGT treatment, you may need to seek an amendment to your net
capital gain (or capital losses carried forward amount) of an earlier income year. You may be
able to seek such amendment by completing labels 7F and 7G of the CGT schedule.

Extension to period of review
Financial benefits under a look-through earnout right can be provided or received up to 5
years after the end of the income year in which the CGT event occurred. In some cases, the
period of review may have passed before you have provided or received the financial
benefit requiring the amendment.

Accordingly, the period of review for all entities’ tax-related liabilities affected by a look-
through earnout right is the later of the period of review that would normally apply and
4 years after the end of the income year in which the last possible financial benefit could be
received or provided under the look-through earnout right. This includes liabilities in
subsequent years and tax related liabilities for taxes other than income tax.

Penalties and interest
You'll not be subject to shortfall interest charge on additional tax that you must pay as a
result of providing or receiving financial benefits under a look-through earnout right. This is
provided you request an amendment to the relevant income tax assessment by the due date
for lodgement of the income year in which you received or provided those financial benefits.

However, the above exception to the shortfall interest charge doesn't apply to the extent
you accessed a concession for which you're ultimately not eligible as a result of receiving or
providing those financial benefits.

The Commissioner isn't liable to pay interest on any overpayment of tax which results from
financial benefits being provided or received under a look-through earnout right.

Remaking choices affected by look-through earnout rights
You can remake any choice previously made where the choice relates to a capital gain or
loss that can be affected by financial benefits provided or received under a look-through
earnout right. However, you need to remake the choice at or before the time you're required

Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                        201
to lodge your income tax return for the income year in which the financial benefit is provided
or received.

Therefore, you may need to reconsider any choices and your entitlement to concessions in
light of financial benefits provided or received to ensure that the resulting gain, loss or cost
base reflects any concessions that are available. Alternatively, you can wait until it is clear
whether or not you'll be finally eligible for the concession before making any choice.

Additionally, if you have made contributions to a super fund in order to access a concession,
you can't withdraw these contributions if the concessions are no longer available.

For more information, see Choices.

Effect of look-through earnout rights on small business CGT
concessions
The future financial benefits received or provided under a look-through earnout right may
affect your eligibility for some CGT concessions. It may also impact on the time allowed for
you to take certain actions to satisfy the eligibility requirements.

For more information, see Small business CGT concessions.

Allocated cost amount (ACA) affected by look-through earnout rights
Subsection 705-65(5B) requires consolidated groups to revise the ACA amount of an entity
that joins the group to take account of subsequent money or property provided in respect of
the acquisition of a membership interest in the entity where the subsequent money or
property wasn't taken into account in working out the ACA when the entity joined the group.

Consolidated groups may need to revise the entry ACA of an entity that joins the group if:
•   the membership interest in the entity was acquired under a look-through earnout
    arrangement
•   subsequent financial benefits were provided or received under the look-through earnout
    right
•   the subsequent financial benefits weren't considered when working out the ACA when
    the entity joined the group.

For more information, see Consolidation.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                  202
Appendixes
Additional information to help you understand and complete your CGT
obligations.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026          203
Appendix 1 Summary of CGT events
Shows a summary of the different types of transactions or events that may
result in a capital gain or capital loss.

Disposal

 CGT event             Time of event                      Capital gain                  Capital loss

 A1 Disposal of a      When the disposal contract         The capital proceeds          The asset’s reduced
 CGT asset             is entered into                    from disposal                 cost base
                        or, if none,                      subtract                      subtract
                        when the entity stops being        the asset’s cost base        capital proceeds
                       the asset’s owner


Hire purchase and similar agreements

 CGT event                         Time of event                  Capital gain         Capital loss

 B1 Use and enjoyment              When use of the CGT            The capital          The asset’s reduced
 before title passes               asset passes                   proceeds             cost base
                                                                  subtract             subtract
                                                                  the asset’s cost     capital proceeds
                                                                  base


End of a CGT asset

 CGT event                   Time of event                     Capital gain              Capital loss

 C1 Loss or destruction      When compensation is              The capital proceeds      The asset’s
 of a CGT asset              first received                    subtract                  reduced cost base
                              or, if none,                     the asset’s cost base     subtract
                              when the loss is                                           capital proceeds
                             discovered or destruction
                             occurred

  C2 Cancellation,           When the contract ending          The capital proceeds      The asset’s
 surrender and similar       an asset is entered into          from the ending           reduced cost base
 endings                      or, if none,                     subtract                  subtract
                              when an asset ends               the asset’s cost base     capital proceeds

 C3 End of an option to      When the option ends              The capital proceeds      The expenditure in
 acquire shares and so                                         from granting the         granting the option
 on                                                            option                    subtract
                                                               subtract                  capital proceeds
                                                               expenditure in
                                                               granting it




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                                204
Bringing a CGT asset into existence

 CGT event                    Time of event         Capital gain                 Capital loss

 D1 Creating contractual      When the              The capital proceeds         The incidental costs of
 or other rights              contract is           from creating the right      creating the right
                              entered into          subtract                     subtract
                               or                    incidental costs of         capital proceeds
                               the right is         creating the right
                              created

 D2 Granting an option        When the option       The capital proceeds         The expenditure to grant
                              is granted            from the grant               the option
                                                    subtract                     subtract
                                                      expenditure to grant it    capital proceeds

 D3 Granting a right to       When the              The capital proceeds         The expenditure to grant
 income from mining           contract is           from the grant of right      the right
                              entered into          subtract                     subtract
                               or, if none,         the expenditure to           capital proceeds
                               when the right is    grant it
                              granted

 D4 Entering into a           When covenant is      The capital proceeds         The reduced cost base
 conservation covenant        entered into          from covenant                apportioned to the
                                                    subtract                     covenant
                                                     cost base apportioned       subtract
                                                    to the covenant               capital proceeds from
                                                                                 covenant


Trusts

 CGT event                        Time of event         Capital gain               Capital loss

 E1 Creating a trust over a       When the trust is     Capital proceeds from      The asset’s reduced
 CGT asset                        created               creating the trust         cost base
                                                        subtract                   subtract
                                                         the asset’s cost base      capital proceeds

 E2 Transferring a CGT            When the asset is     Capital proceeds from      The asset’s reduced
 asset to a trust                 transferred           the transfer               cost base
                                                        subtract                   subtract
                                                         the asset’s cost base      capital proceeds

 E3 Converting a trust to a       When the trust is     Market value of the        The asset’s reduced
 unit trust                       converted             asset at that time         cost base
                                                        subtract                   subtract
                                                         its cost base              that market value

 E4 Capital payment for           When the trustee      Non-assessable part        No capital loss
 trust interest (including        makes the             of the payment
                                  payment               subtract


Australian Taxation Office    Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                              205
 CGT event                        Time of event         Capital gain             Capital loss
 CCIV sub-fund trust                                     the cost base of the
 interest)                                              trust interest

 E5 Beneficiary becoming          When the              For a trustee,           For a trustee,
 entitled to a trust asset        beneficiary           market value of the       the reduced cost base
                                  becomes               CGT asset at that time   of the CGT asset at that
                                  absolutely            subtract                 time
                                  entitled               its cost base           subtract
                                                                                 that market value
                                                         For a beneficiary,
                                                         that market value        For a beneficiary,
                                                        subtract                  the reduced cost base
                                                         the cost base of the    of the beneficiary’s
                                                        beneficiary’s capital    capital interest
                                                        interest                 subtract
                                                                                 that market value

 E6 Disposal to a                 The time of the       For a trustee,           For a trustee,
 beneficiary to end an            disposal              market value of the       the reduced cost base
 income right                                           CGT asset at that time   of the CGT asset at that
                                                        subtract                 time
                                                         its cost base           subtract
                                                                                 that market value
                                                         For a beneficiary,
                                                         that market value        For a beneficiary,
                                                        subtract                  the reduced cost base
                                                         the cost base of the    of the beneficiary’s
                                                        beneficiary’s right to   right to income
                                                        income                   subtract
                                                                                 that market value

 E7 Disposal to a                 The time of the       For a trustee,           For a trustee,
 beneficiary to end capital       disposal              market value of the       the reduced cost base
 interest                                               CGT asset at that time   of the CGT asset at that
                                                        subtract                 time
                                                         its cost base           subtract
                                                                                 that market value
                                                         For a beneficiary,
                                                         that market value        For a beneficiary,
                                                        subtract                  the reduced cost base
                                                         the cost base of the    of the beneficiary’s
                                                        beneficiary’s capital    capital interest
                                                        interest                 subtract
                                                                                 that market value

 E8 Disposal by a                 When the              Capital proceeds         The appropriate
 beneficiary of capital           disposal contract     subtract                 proportion of the trust’s
 interest                         is entered into        the appropriate         net assets
                                   or, if none,         proportion of the        subtract
                                   when the             trust’s net assets       the capital proceeds
                                  beneficiary



Australian Taxation Office    Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                           206
 CGT event                        Time of event         Capital gain               Capital loss
                                  ceases to own
                                  the CGT asset

 E9 Creating a trust over         When the entity       Market value of the        The incidental costs in
 future property                  makes an              property (as if it         making the agreement
                                  agreement             existed when the           subtract
                                                        agreement was made)        the market value of the
                                                        subtract                   property (as if it existed
                                                        incidental costs in        when the agreement
                                                        making the agreement       was made)

 E10 Annual cost base             When reduction        Excess of cost base        No capital loss
 reduction exceeds cost           happens               reduction over cost
 base of interest in AMIT /                             base
 attribution CCIV sub-fund
 trust


Leases

 CGT event              Time of event                    Capital gain              Capital loss

 F1 Granting a lease    For granting a lease, when       Capital proceeds          Expenditure on grant,
                        the entity enters into the       subtract                  renewal or extension
                        lease contract                    the expenditure on       subtract
                         or, if none,                    grant, renewal or         capital proceeds
                         at the start of the lease       extension

                         For a lease renewal or
                        extension, at the start of
                        the renewal or extension

 F2 Granting a long-    For granting a lease,            Capital proceeds from     Reduced cost base of
 term lease              when the lessor grants          the grant, renewal or     the leased property
                        the lease                        extension                 subtract
                                                         subtract                   the capital proceeds
                         For a lease renewal or           the cost base of the     from the grant, renewal
                        extension,                       leased property           or extension
                         at the start of the
                        renewal or extension

 F3 Lessor pays         When the lease term is           No capital gain           Amount of expenditure
 lessee to get lease    varied or waived                                           to get lessee’s
 changed                                                                           agreement

 F4 Lessee receives     When the lease term is           Capital proceeds          No capital loss
 payment for            varied or waived                 subtract
 changing a lease                                         the cost base of lease




Australian Taxation Office    Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                             207
 CGT event                Time of event                  Capital gain                  Capital loss

 F5 Lessor receives       When the lease term is         Capital proceeds              Expenditure for
 payment for              varied or waived               subtract                      variation or waiver
 changing a lease                                         expenditure for              subtract
                                                         variation or waiver           capital proceeds


Shares

 CGT event                                   Time of event                  Capital gain     Capital loss

 G1 Capital payment for shares               When the company pays          Payment          No capital loss
                                             a non-assessable               subtract
                                             amount                         cost base
                                                                            of shares

 G3 Liquidator or administrator              When declaration is            No capital       Reduced cost
 declares shares or financial                made                           gain             base of shares
 instruments worthless                                                                        or financial
                                                                                             instruments


Special capital receipts

 CGT event                   Time of event            Capital gain                   Capital loss

 H1 Forfeiture of a          When the deposit is      Deposit                        Expenditure in
 deposit                     forfeited                subtract                       Connection with the
                                                       expenditure in                prospective sale
                                                      connection with the            subtract
                                                      prospective sale                 deposit

 H2 Receipt for an           When the act,            Capital proceeds               Incidental costs
 event relating to a         transaction or event     subtract                       subtract
 CGT asset                   occurred                  incidental costs                capital proceeds


Cessation of residency

 CGT event                    Time of event                  Capital gain                Capital loss

 I1 Individual or             When the individual or         For each CGT asset          For each CGT asset
 company stops being          company stops being an         the person owns, its        the person owns, its
 an Australian resident       Australian resident            market value                reduced cost base
                                                             subtract                    subtract
                                                                its cost base            its market value

 I2 Trust stops being a       When the trust ceases to       For each CGT asset          For each CGT asset
 resident trust               be a resident trust for        the trustee owns, its       the trustee owns, its
                              CGT purposes                   market value                reduced cost base




Australian Taxation Office    Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                                  208
 CGT event                   Time of event                 Capital gain                  Capital loss
                                                           subtract                      subtract
                                                               its cost base             its market value


Reversal of roll-over

 CGT event                         Time of event                Capital gain               Capital loss

 J1 Company stops being a          When the company             Market value of the        Reduced cost base
 member of a wholly owned          stops being a                asset at the time of       of the asset
 group after a roll-over           member of a wholly           the event                  subtract
                                   owned group after a          subtract                   that market value
                                   roll-over                     its cost base

 J2 Change for replacement         when the change              The amount                 No capital loss
 asset or improved asset           happens                      mentioned in
 after a roll-over under                                        subsection 104-
 Subdivision 152-E                                              185(5)

 J4 Trust failing to cease to      when the failure to          For a company,             For a company,
 exist after roll-over under       cease to exist                market value of the        reduced cost base
 Subdivision 124-N                 happens                      asset at the time the      of the asset at the
                                                                company acquired it        time the company
                                                                subtract                   acquired it
                                                                 its cost base at that     subtract
                                                                time                        its market value at
                                                                                           that time
                                                                 For a shareholder,
                                                                 market value of the        For a shareholder,
                                                                share at the time the       reduced cost base
                                                                shareholder                of the share at the
                                                                acquired it                time the
                                                                subtract                   shareholder
                                                                 its cost base at that     acquired it
                                                                time                       subtract
                                                                                            its market value at
                                                                                           that time

 J5 Failure to acquire             At the end of the            The amount of the          No capital loss
 replacement asset and to          replacement asset            capital gain that you
 incur 4th element                 period                       disregarded under
 expenditure after a roll-over                                  Subdivision 152-E
 under Subdivision 152-E

 J6 Cost of acquisition of         At the end of the            The amount                 No capital loss
 replacement asset or amount       replacement asset            mentioned in
 of 4th element expenditure,       period                       subsection 104-
 or both, not sufficient to                                     198(3)
 cover disregarded capital
 gain




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                                 209
Other CGT events

 CGT event                      Time of event               Capital gain                 Capital loss

 K1 Incoming international      when you start to hold      unit's market value is       unit's market value
 transfer of emissions unit     the unit as a               more than its cost base      is less than its cost
                                registered emissions                                     base
                                unit

 K2 Bankrupt pays an            When payment is             No capital gain              That part of the
 amount for debt                made                                                     payment that
                                                                                         relates to the
                                                                                         denied part of a net
                                                                                         capital loss

 K3 Asset passing to a          When an individual          Market value of the          Reduced cost base
 tax-advantaged entity          dies                        asset at death               of the asset
                                                            subtract                     subtract
                                                                its cost base            that market value

 K4 CGT asset starts            When the asset starts       Market value of asset        Reduced cost base
 being trading stock            being trading stock         subtract                     of the asset
                                                                its cost base            subtract
                                                                                         that market value

 K5 Special capital loss        When CGT event A1,          No capital gain              Market value of the
 from a collectable that        C2 or E8 happens to                                      shares or interest
 has fallen in market value     shares in the                                            (as if the
                                company, or an                                           collectable hadn't
                                interest in the trust,                                   fallen in market
                                that owns the                                            value)
                                collectable                                              subtract
                                                                                          the capital
                                                                                         proceeds from CGT
                                                                                         event A1, C2 or E8

 K6 Pre-CGT shares or           When another CGT            Capital proceeds from        No capital loss
 trust interest                 event involving the         the shares or trust
                                shares or interest          interest that are
                                happens                     attributable to post-
                                                            CGT assets owned by
                                                            the company or trust
                                                            subtract
                                                                the assets’ cost bases

 K7 Balancing adjustment        When the balancing          Termination value            Cost
 occurs for a depreciating      adjustment event            subtract                     less
 asset that you used for        occurs                          cost times fraction       termination value
 purposes other than                                                                     times fraction
 taxable purposes

 K8 Direct value shifts         The decrease time for       Capital gain worked out      No capital loss
 affecting your equity or       the interests               under section 725-365



Australian Taxation Office    Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                               210
 CGT event                       Time of event               Capital gain              Capital loss
 loan interests in a
 company or trust

 K9 Entitlement to receive       When you become             Capital proceeds from     No capital loss
 payment of a carried            entitled to receive the     the entitlement
 interest                        payment

 K10 You make a forex            When the forex              Equal to the forex        No capital loss
 realisation gain as a           realisation event           realisation gain
 result of forex realisation     happens
 event 2 and item 1 of the
 table in subsection 775-
 70(1) applies

 K11 You make a forex            When the forex              No capital gain           Equal to the forex
 realisation loss as a           realisation event                                     realisation loss
 result of forex realisation     happens
 event 2, and item 1 of the
 table in subsection 775-
 75(1) applies

 K12 Foreign hybrid loss         Just before the end of      No capital gain           The amount stated
 exposure adjustment             the income year                                       in subsection 104-
                                                                                       270(3)


Consolidations

 CGT event                               Time of event               Capital gain       Capital loss

 L1 Reduction under section 705-         Just after entity           No capital gain    Amount of
 57 in tax cost setting amount of        becomes subsidiary                             reduction
 assets of entity becoming               member
 subsidiary member of
 consolidated group or MEC
 group

 L2 Amount remaining after               Just after entity           Amount             No capital loss
 step 3A etc of ‘joining allocable       becomes subsidiary          remaining
 cost amount' is negative                member

 L3 Tax cost setting amounts for         Just after entity           Amount of          No capital loss
 retained cost base assets               becomes subsidiary          excess
 exceed joining allocable cost           member
 amount

 L4 No reset cost base assets            Just after entity           No capital gain    Amount of excess
 against which to apply excess of        becomes subsidiary
 net allocable cost amount on            member
 joining




Australian Taxation Office     Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                              211
 CGT event                             Time of event           Capital gain         Capital loss

 L5 Amount remaining after             When entity ceases to   Amount               No capital loss
 step 4 of ‘leaving allocable cost     be subsidiary member    remaining
 amount' is negative

 L6 Error in calculation of tax cost   Start of the income     The net              The net
 setting amount for joining            year when the           overstated           understated
 entity’s assets                       Commissioner            amount resulting     amount resulting
                                       becomes aware of the    from the errors,     from the errors,
                                       errors                   or                   or
                                                                a portion of that    a portion of that
                                                               amount               amount

 L8 Reduction in tax cost setting      Just after entity       No capital gain      Amount of
 amount for reset cost base            becomes subsidiary                           reduction that
 assets on joining can't be            member                                       can't be allocated
 allocated




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                          212
Appendix 2 Consumer price index (CPI)
Shows the consumer price index from 1985 to 1999 for each quarter.

All groups: weighted average of 8 capital cities

 Year      Quarter ending           Quarter ending             Quarter ending   Quarter ending
           31 Mar                   30 Jun                     30 Sep           31 Dec

 1985      –                        –                          39.7             40.5

 1986      41.4                     42.1                       43.2             44.4

 1987      45.3                     46.0                       46.8             47.6

 1988      48.4                     49.3                       50.2             51.2

 1989      51.7                     53.0                       54.2             55.2

 1990      56.2                     57.1                       57.5             59.0

 1991      58.9                     59.0                       59.3             59.9

 1992      59.9                     59.7                       59.8             60.1

 1993      60.6                     60.8                       61.1             61.2

 1994      61.5                     61.9                       62.3             62.8

 1995      63.8                     64.7                       65.5             66.0

 1996      66.2                     66.7                       66.9             67.0

 1997      67.1                     66.9                       66.6             66.8

 1998      67.0                     67.4                       67.5             67.8

 1999      67.8                     68.1                       68.7             n/a (see Note 1)

For an explanation of indexation and how it applies, see The indexation method.

Note 1: If you use the indexation method to calculate your capital gain, the indexation factor
is based on increases in the CPI up to September 1999 only.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                       213
Appendix 3 Flowcharts
Work through the flowcharts on how to treat bonus shares, rights or options,
and main residence exemption rules.

Flowchart 3.1 – Bonus shares on or after 20 September 1985
Treatment of bonus shares issued on or after 20 September 1985, read through the
questions and answers.

Question 1 Did you acquire the original shares on or after 20 September 1985?
•   Yes – Read on from Question 2 Is any part of the bonus shares a dividend or treated as
    a dividend?
•   No – Read on from Question 4 Is any part of the bonus shares a dividend or treated as a
    dividend?

Question 2 Is any part of the bonus shares a dividend or treated as a dividend?
•   Yes – Read on from Question 3 Were the bonus shares issued before 1 July 1987?
•   No – Read Answer 1 Bonus shares acquisition date and CGT.

Question 3 Were the bonus shares issued before 1 July 1987?
•   Yes – Read Answer 1 Bonus shares acquisition date and CGT.
•   No – Read Answer 3 Bonus shares acquisition date and CGT.

Question 4 Is any part of the bonus shares a dividend or treated as a dividend?
•   Yes – Read on from Question 5 Were the bonus shares issued before 1 July 1987?
•   No – Read on from Question 6 Are the bonus shares partly paid?

Question 5 Were the bonus shares issued before 1 July 1987?
•   Yes – Read on from Question 6 Are the bonus shares partly paid?
•   No – Read Answer 2 Bonus shares acquisition date and CGT.

Question 6 Are the bonus shares partly paid?
•   Yes – Read on from Question 7 Were the bonus shares issued before 10 December
    1986?
•   No – Read Answer 4 Bonus shares acquisition date and CGT.

Question 7 Were the bonus shares issued before 10 December 1986?
•   Yes – Read Answer 4 Bonus shares acquisition date and CGT.
•   No – Read on from Question 8 Before sale of the bonus shares, were any more call
    payments made to the company?




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                            214
Question 8 Before sale of the bonus shares, were any more call payments made to
the company?
•   Yes – Read Answer 5 Bonus shares acquisition date and CGT.
•   No – Read Answer 4 Bonus shares acquisition date and CGT.

Answer 1 Bonus shares acquisition date and CGT
108.     The bonus shares are subject to capital gains tax.

109.     The bonus shares are acquired when the original shares were acquired.

110. The cost base of each original and bonus share is equal to
    a.    the cost base of the original shares divided by the total number of original and
          bonus shares, plus
    b.    any calls on partly paid bonus shares.

Answer 2 Bonus shares acquisition date and CGT
111. The bonus shares are subject to capital gains tax if issued on or after 20 September
     1985.

112. The acquisition date of the bonus shares is their date of issue.

113. The cost base is the amount of the dividend plus any calls on partly paid bonus shares.

Answer 3 Bonus shares acquisition date and CGT
114. The bonus shares are subject to capital gains tax.

115. The acquisition date of the bonus shares is their date of issue.

116. The cost base is the amount of the dividend, plus any calls on partly paid bonus shares.

Answer 4 Bonus shares acquisition date and CGT
You're taken to have acquired the bonus shares before 20 September 1985 and they aren't
subject to capital gains tax.

Answer 5 Bonus shares acquisition date and CGT
117. The bonus shares are subject to capital gains tax.

118. The acquisition date of the bonus shares is the date when the liability to pay the first
     call arises.

119. The cost base is the market value of the bonus shares just before the liability to pay the
     first call arises, plus the amount of call payments made.

Flowchart 3.2 – Bonus units issued on or after 20 September 1985
Treatment of bonus units issued on or after 20 September 1985, read through the questions
and answers.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                    215
Question 1 Did you acquire the original units on or after 20 September 1985?
•   Yes – Read on from Question 2 Is any part of the bonus units included in your
    assessable income?
•   No – Read on from Question 3 Is any part of the bonus units included in your assessable
    income?

Question 2 Is any part of the bonus units included in your assessable income?
•   Yes – Read Answer 1 Bonus units acquisition date and CGT.
•   No – Read Answer 2 Bonus units acquisition date and CGT.

Question 3 Is any part of the bonus units included in your assessable income?
•   Yes – Read on from Question 4 Were the bonus units issued on or after 20 September
    1985?
•   No – Read on from Question 5 Are the bonus units partly paid?

Question 4 Were the bonus units issued on or after 20 September 1985?
•   Yes – Read Answer 1 Bonus units acquisition date and CGT.
•   No – Read

Question 5 Are the bonus units partly paid?
•   Yes – Read on from Question 6 Were the bonus units issued before 10 December 1986?
•   No – Read Answer 4 Bonus units acquisition date and CGT.

Question 6 Were the bonus units issued before 10 December 1986?
•   Yes – Read Answer 4 Bonus units acquisition date and CGT.
•   No – Read on from Question 7 Before the sale of the bonus units were any more call
    payments made to the trust?

Question 7 Before the sale of the bonus units were any more call payments made
to the trust?
•   Yes – Read Answer 3 Bonus units acquisition date and CGT.
•   No – Read Answer 4 Bonus units acquisition date and CGT.

Answer 1 Bonus units acquisition date and CGT
120.    The bonus units are subject to capital gains tax.

121. The acquisition date of the bonus units is their date of issue.

122. The cost base is the amount included in assessable income, plus any calls on partly
    paid bonus units.

Answer 2 Bonus units acquisition date and CGT
123.    The bonus units are subject to capital gains tax.



Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                             216
124.     The bonus units are acquired when the original units were acquired.

125.     The cost base of each original and bonus unit is equal to
    a.    the cost of the original units divided by the total number of original and bonus units,
          plus
    b.    any calls on partly paid bonus units.

Answer 3 Bonus units acquisition date and CGT
126.     The bonus units are subject to capital gains tax.

127.The acquisition date of the bonus units is the date when the liability to pay the first call
    arises.

128. The cost base is the market value of the bonus units just before the liability to pay
    the first call arises, plus the amount of call payments made.

Answer 4 Bonus units acquisition date and CGT
You're taken to have acquired the bonus units before 20 September 1985 and they aren't
subject to capital gains tax.

Flowchart 3.3 – Treatment of rights or options issued for no cost as a
share or unit holder
Treatment of rights or options to either:
•   acquire shares where the rights or options were issued directly to you by the company
    (but not under an employee share scheme) for no payment because you were a
    shareholder
•   acquire units where the rights or options were issued directly to you after 28 January
    1988 by the trust for no payment because you were a unit holder.

Read through the questions and answers.

Question 1 Did you acquire the original shares or units before 20 September 1985?
•   Yes – Read Question 2 Did you exercise the rights or options on or after 20 September
    1985?
•   No – The acquisition date of the rights or options is the date of acquisition of the original
    shares or units. Read Question 3 Did you exercise the rights or options?

Question 2 Did you exercise the rights or options on or after 20 September 1985?
•   Yes – Read Answer 1 Shares or units acquired on exercise of the rights or options –
    directly issued, no payment.
•   No – Read Answer 2 Shares or units acquired on exercise of the rights or options –
    directly issued, no payment.

Question 3 Did you exercise the rights or options?
•   Yes – Read Answer 3 Shares or units acquired on exercise of the rights or options –
    directly issued, no payment.


Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                  217
•   No – Read Answer 4 Shares or units acquired on exercise of the rights or options –
    directly issued, no payment.

Answer 1 Shares or units acquired on exercise of the rights or options – directly
issued, no payment
129. The shares or units acquired on exercise of the rights or options are subject to capital
    gains tax.

130. The acquisition date of the shares or units is the date of exercise of the rights or
    options to acquire the shares or units.

131. The first element of the cost base and the reduced cost base of the shares or units are
    a.    the market value of the rights or options at the time you exercise them, plus
    b.    the amount you pay for the shares or units on exercising the rights or options, plus
    c.    any amount that was included in your assessable income as a result of the rights or
          options being exercised on or after 1 July 2001.

Although the shares or units are subject to capital gains tax, any capital gain or capital loss
you make from exercising the rights or options to acquire those shares or units is
disregarded.

Answer 2 Shares or units acquired on exercise of the rights or options – directly
issued, no payment
132. If you didn't exercise the rights or options, you disregard any capital gain or capital
    loss on the sale or expiry of the rights or options.

133. If you exercised the rights or options before that date, you disregard any capital gain
    or capital loss you make when you dispose of the shares or units that you acquired.

Answer 3 Shares or units acquired on exercise of the rights or options – directly
issued, no payment
134. The shares or units acquired on exercise of the rights or options are subject to capital
    gains tax.

135.     The acquisition date of the shares or units is the date of the exercise.

136. The first element of the cost base and the reduced cost base of the shares or units
    are
    a.    the cost base of the rights or options at the time of exercise, plus
    b.    the amount you pay for the shares or units on exercising the rights or options, plus
    c.    any amount that was included in your assessable income as a result of the rights or
          options being exercised on or after 1 July 2001.

Although the shares or units are subject to capital gains tax, any capital gain or capital loss
you make from exercising the rights or options to acquire those shares or units is
disregarded.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                   218
Answer 4 Shares or units acquired on exercise of the rights or options – directly
issued, no payment
If the capital proceeds on the sale or expiry of the rights or options are more than their cost
base, you make a capital gain.

If the capital proceeds are less than their reduced cost base, you make a capital loss.

Flowchart 3.4 – Treatment of rights or options you acquire from a share
or unit holder
Treatment of rights or options to acquire either:
•   shares where the rights or options were acquired by you from an individual or entity that
    acquired them as a shareholder in the company
•   units where the rights or options were issued after 28 January 1988 and were acquired
    by you from an individual or entity that acquired them as a unit holder in the trust.

Read through the questions and answers.

Question 1 Did you acquire the rights or options before 20 September 1985?
•   Yes – Read Question 3 Did you exercise the rights or options on or after 20 September
    1985?
•   No – The acquisition date of the rights or options was the date of the contract to acquire
    the rights or options or, if there was no contract, the date the other individual or entity
    stopped being the owner of the rights or options. Read Question 2 Did you exercise the
    rights or options?

Question 2 Did you exercise the rights or options?
•   Yes – Read Answer 4 Shares acquired on exercise of the rights or options from an
    individual or entity.
•   No – Read Answer 1 Shares acquired on exercise of the rights or options from an
    individual or entity.

Question 3 Did you exercise the rights or options on or after 20 September 1985?
•   Yes – Read Answer 3 Shares acquired on exercise of the rights or options from an
    individual or entity.
•   No – Read Answer 2 Shares acquired on exercise of the rights or options from an
    individual or entity.

Answer 1 Shares acquired on exercise of the rights or options from an individual or
entity
If the capital proceeds on the sale or expiry of the rights or options are more than their cost
base, you make a capital gain.

If the capital proceeds are less than their reduced cost base, you make a capital loss.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                 219
Answer 2 Shares acquired on exercise of the rights or options from an individual or
entity
137.      If you didn't exercise the rights or options, you disregard any capital gain or capital
       loss on the sale or expiry of the rights or options.

138. If you exercised the rights or options before that date, you disregard any capital gain
    or capital loss when you dispose of the shares or units that you acquired.

Answer 3 Shares acquired on exercise of the rights or options from an individual or
entity
139. The shares acquired on exercise of the rights or options are subject to capital gains
    tax.

140. The acquisition date of the shares is the date of exercise of the rights or options to
    acquire the shares or units.

141. The first element of the cost base and the reduced cost base of the shares are
       a.    the market value of the rights or options at the time you exercise them, plus
       b.    the amount you pay for the shares on exercising the rights or options, plus
       c.    if the rights or options were exercised on or after 1 July 2001 and, as a result, an
             amount is included in your assessable income, that amount.

Although the shares or units are subject to capital gains tax, any capital gain or capital loss
you make from exercising the rights or options to acquire those shares or units is
disregarded.

Answer 4 Shares acquired on exercise of the rights or options from an individual or
entity
142. The shares or units acquired on exercise of the rights or options are subject to capital
    gains tax.

143. The acquisition date of the shares or units is the date of exercise of the rights or
    options.

144.        The first element of the cost base and the reduced cost base of the shares or units is
       a.    the cost base of the rights or options at the time of exercise, plus
       b.    the amount you paid for the shares or units on exercising the rights or options, plus
       c.    any amount that was included in your assessable income as a result of the rights or
             options being exercised on or after 1 July 2001.

Although the shares or units are subject to capital gains tax, any capital gain or capital loss
you make from exercising the rights or options to acquire those shares or units is
disregarded.

Flowchart 3.5 – Treatment of rights or options to acquire shares or units
you issued directly from a company
Treatment of rights or options to acquire shares or units where you either:


Australian Taxation Office    Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                       220
•   paid for and which were issued directly to you from the company (but not under an
    employee share scheme) or trust
•   acquired from an individual or entity that wasn't a shareholder or unit holder.

This flowchart doesn't apply to rights or options for the issue of units by the grantor of the
rights or options if they were exercised before 27 May 2005.

Read through the questions and answers.

Question 1 Did you acquire the rights or options before 20 September 1985?
•   Yes – Read Question 2 Did you exercise the rights or options?
•   No – Read Question 4 Did you exercise the rights or options?

Question 2 Did you exercise the rights or options?
•   Yes – Read Question 3 Did you exercise the rights or options on or after 20 September
    1985?
•   No – Read Answer 1 Rights or options to acquire shares or units you pay for and directly
    issued by the company.

Question 3 Did you exercise the rights or options on or after 20 September 1985?
•   Yes – Read Question 5 Were the rights or options renewed or extended after
    20 September 1985?
•   No – Read Answer 4 Rights or options to acquire shares or units you pay for and directly
    issued by the company.

Question 4 Did you exercise the rights or options?
•   Yes – Read Answer 3 Rights or options to acquire shares or units you pay for and
    directly issued by the company.
•   No – Read Answer 2 Rights or options to acquire shares or units you pay for and directly
    issued by the company.

Question 5 Were the rights or options renewed or extended after 20 September
1985?
•   Yes – Read Question 6 Were they exercised before 27 May 2005?
•   No – Read Answer 5 Rights or options to acquire shares or units you pay for and directly
    issued by the company.

Question 6 Were they exercised before 27 May 2005?
•   Yes – Read Answer 5 Rights or options to acquire shares or units you pay for and
    directly issued by the company.
•   No – Read Answer 3 Rights or options to acquire shares or units you pay for and directly
    issued by the company.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                 221
Answer 1 Rights or options to acquire shares or units you pay for and directly
issued by the company
You disregard any capital gain or capital loss you make on the sale or expiry of the rights or
options.

Answer 2 Rights or options to acquire shares or units you pay for and directly
issued by the company
If the capital proceeds on the sale or expiry of the rights or options are more than their cost
base, you make a capital gain. If the capital proceeds are less than their reduced cost base,
you make a capital loss.

Answer 3 Rights or options to acquire shares or units you pay for and directly
issued by the company
145. The shares or units acquired on exercise of the rights or options are subject to capital
    gains tax.

146. The acquisition date of the shares or units is the date of exercise of the rights or
    options.

147.     The first element of the cost base and the reduced cost base of the shares or units is
    a.    the amount you paid for the rights or options, plus
    b.    the amount you paid for the shares or units on exercising the rights or options.

Although the shares or units are subject to capital gains tax, any capital gain or capital loss
you make from exercising the rights or options to acquire those shares or units is
disregarded.

Answer 4 Rights or options to acquire shares or units you pay for and directly
issued by the company
You disregard any capital gain or capital loss on the shares or units acquired from the
exercise of the rights or options because the shares or units were acquired before
20 September 1985.

Answer 5 Rights or options to acquire shares or units you pay for and directly
issued by the company
148. The shares or units acquired on exercise of the rights or options are subject to capital
    gains tax.

149. The acquisition date of the shares or units is the date of exercise of the rights or
    options.

150. The first element of the cost base and the reduced cost base of the shares or units
    are
    a.    the market value of the rights or options at the time you exercised them, plus
    b.    the amount you paid for the shares on exercising the rights or options.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                 222
Although the shares or units are subject to capital gains tax, any capital gain or capital loss
you make from exercising the rights or options to acquire those shares or units is
disregarded.

Flowchart 3.6 – CGT main residence exemption when you sell an
inherited dwelling
This flowchart doesn't apply where you or the deceased person were a foreign resident. For
rules that apply in this situation, see Inherited property and CGT.

Read through the questions and answers for the capital gains tax (CGT) main residence
exemption rules when you sell a dwelling you inherit.

Read with this flowchart, Real estate and main residence.

Question 1 Did the deceased person acquire the dwelling before 20 September
1985?
•   Yes – Read Question 2 Did settlement of your contract to sell the dwelling happen within
    2 years of the person dying (or did the Commissioner allow you more time)?
•   No – Read Question 3 Was the dwelling the deceased person’s main residence just
    before they died?

Question 2 Did settlement of your contract to sell the dwelling happen within 2
years of the person dying (or did the Commissioner allow you more time)?
•   Yes – Read Answer 1 CGT main residence exemption rules when you sell a dwelling you
    inherited.
•   No – Read Question 5 From the deceased person’s death until settlement of your
    contract to sell the inherited dwelling, was it your main residence (or the main residence
    of an individual who had a right to occupy it under the will or the spouse of the
    deceased person)?

Question 3 Was the dwelling the deceased person’s main residence just before
they died?
•   Yes – Read Question 4 Just before they died, was the dwelling being used to produce
    income.
•   No – Read Answer 2 CGT main residence exemption rules when you sell a dwelling you
    inherited.

Question 4 Just before they died, was the dwelling being used to produce income
•   Yes – Read Answer 2 CGT main residence exemption rules when you sell a dwelling you
    inherited.
•   No – Read Question 2 Did settlement of your contract to sell the dwelling happen within
    2 years of the person dying (or did the Commissioner allow you more time)?




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                 223
Question 5 From the deceased person’s death until settlement of your contract to
sell the inherited dwelling, was it your main residence (or the main residence of an
individual who had a right to occupy it under the will or the spouse of the deceased
person)?
•   Yes – Read Question 6 From the deceased person’s death until settlement of your
    contract to sell the inherited dwelling, was any part of the dwelling used to produce
    income?
•   No – Read Answer 2 CGT main residence exemption rules when you sell a dwelling you
    inherited.

Question 6 From the deceased person’s death until settlement of your contract to
sell the inherited dwelling, was any part of the dwelling used to produce income?
•   Yes – Read Answer 2 CGT main residence exemption rules when you sell a dwelling you
    inherited.
•   No – Read Answer 1 CGT main residence exemption rules when you sell a dwelling you
    inherited.

Answer 1 CGT main residence exemption rules when you sell a dwelling you
inherited
Dwelling is fully exempt.

Answer 2 CGT main residence exemption rules when you sell a dwelling you
inherited
Dwelling isn't fully exempt (but you may qualify for a part exemption).

Dwellings that passed to you before 21 August 1996

This flowchart doesn't apply to a dwelling that passed to you before 21 August 1996. For the
rules that apply in that situation, see Real estate and main residence.

Where the deceased person died before 20 September 1985

If the deceased person died before 20 September 1985, the dwelling is fully exempt when
you sell it. However, if you made a major capital improvement to the dwelling on or after
20 September 1985 and have used it to produce assessable income it may be subject to
CGT, see Real estate and main residence.

Where you or the deceased person were a foreign resident

This flowchart doesn't apply where you or the deceased person were a foreign resident. For
rules that apply in this situation, see Inherited property and CGT.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                224
Appendix 4 Definitions
Check out common terms used in this guide and what they mean.

Adjusted Division 6 percentage
A beneficiary's adjusted Division 6 percentage is the percentage of the income of the trust
estate (disregarding any amount of a capital gain or a franked distribution to which any
beneficiary or the trustee is specifically entitled) that they're presently entitled to.

For more information, see Trusts.

Amount of capital gains from a trust (including a managed fund)
Distributions from trusts can include different amounts but only the following types of
amounts are relevant for CGT purposes:
•   distributions of all or a part of the trust’s income where the trust’s net income for tax
    purposes includes a net capital gain
•   distributions or other entitlements described as being referable to a specific capital gain
    or gains
•   distributions of non-assessable amounts.

For more information, see Trust distributions.

Assessable income
Assessable income is all the income you have received and that you include in your tax
return. Generally, assessable income doesn't include non-assessable payments from a unit
trust, including a managed fund.

Attribution corporate collective investment vehicle sub-fund trust
An attribution corporate collective investment vehicle (CCIV) sub-fund trust is a sub-fund of
a CCIV which meets certain AMIT eligibility criteria in an income year and so is treated as an
AMIT for that income year under the attribution regime in Division 276 of the Income Tax
Assessment Act 1997.

Attribution managed investment trust
An attribution managed investment trust (AMIT) is a managed investment trust (MIT) whose
trustee has chosen to apply the attribution rules in Division 276 of the Income Tax
Assessment Act 1997.

Attribution managed investment trust member annual statement
An attribution managed investment trust member annual statement (AMMA) is a member
statement provided by an attribution managed investment trust (AMIT) or an attribution
corporate collective investment vehicle (CCIV) sub-fund trust to each of its members for an
income year.



Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                    225
Bonus shares
Bonus shares are additional shares a shareholder receives wholly or partly as a dividend.
You may also be required to pay an amount to get them.

Bonus units
Bonus units are additional units a unit holder receives from the trust. You may also be
required to pay an amount to get them.

Call on shares
A company may sometimes issue a partly paid share and then make a call to pay up part or
all of the remaining outstanding balance.

Capital gain
You may make a capital gain from a CGT event such as the sale of an asset. Generally, your
capital gain is the difference between your asset’s cost base (what you paid for it) and your
capital proceeds (what you received for it). You can also make a capital gain if a managed
fund distributes an amount described as a capital gain to you.

Under the trust provisions, you may make a capital gain if you're either or both:
•   specifically entitled to an amount of a capital gain made by the trust
•   there is an amount of capital gain included in the income of the trust to which no entity
    is specifically entitled and you're presently entitled to a share of that income.

For more information, see Trusts.

Capital gains disregarded by a foreign resident
If a foreign resident or the trustee of a foreign trust for CGT purposes had a CGT event
happen in 2025–26, to a CGT asset that isn't taxable Australian property, any capital gain or
capital loss made is disregarded under Division 855 of the Income Tax Assessment Act
1997.
For more information, see:
•   Foreign residents, temporary residents and changing residency
•   Taxable Australian property

Capital gains tax
Capital gains tax (CGT) refers to the income tax you pay on any net capital gain which you
make and include in your annual income tax return. For example, when you sell (or otherwise
dispose of) an asset as part of a CGT event, you're subject to CGT.

Capital improvement
A capital improvement is an improvement to an asset. A capital improvement doesn't include
a repair that is deductible for income tax purposes.



Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                226
Capital loss
Generally, you make a capital loss as a result of a CGT event if the capital proceeds you
receive for an asset are less than its reduced cost base (what you paid for it).

Capital proceeds
Capital proceeds is the term used to describe the amount of money or the value of any
property you receive or are entitled to receive as a result of a CGT event. For shares or
units, capital proceeds may be:
•   the amount you receive from the purchaser of the shares or units
•   the value of the shares or units you receive on a demerger
•   the value of the shares or units and the amount of cash you receive on a merger or
    takeover
•   the market value of the shares or units which you give away.

CGT asset
CGT assets include shares, units in a unit trust, collectables (such as jewellery), assets for
personal use (such as furniture or a boat) and other assets (such as an investment
property).

CGT-concession amounts
These amounts are the CGT discount component of any actual distribution from a managed
fund.

CGT discount
The CGT discount is the amount (or percentage) by which a capital gain may be reduced
under the discount method, see The discount method.

CGT event
A CGT event happens when a transaction takes place such as the sale of a CGT asset. The
result is usually a capital gain or capital loss.

Collectables
A collectable is an artwork, an item of jewellery, an antique, a coin, a medallion, a rare folio, a
rare manuscript, a rare book, a postage stamp or a first day cover that is used or kept mainly
for personal use or enjoyment. Collectables also include an interest in any of the listed
items, a debt that arises from any of those items or an option or right to acquire any of those
items.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                   227
Consolidation rules
From 1 July 2002, consolidation refers to taxing wholly owned groups as single entities, and
enables assets to be transferred between members of a group without triggering capital
gains or requiring cost base adjustments for membership interests. Subsidiary members are
treated as part of the head company. Intra-group transactions are disregarded for income
tax purposes.

Convertible note
A convertible note is a type of investment you can make in a company or unit trust. A
convertible note earns interest on the amount you pay to acquire the note until the note’s
expiry date. On expiry of the note, you can either ask for the return of the money paid or
convert that amount to acquire new shares or units.

Corporate collective investment vehicle
A corporate collective investment vehicle (CCIV) is a collective investment vehicle which is
in legal form a registered company limited by shares. It comprises one or more sub-funds
and is operated by a single corporate director. A sub-fund of a CCIV is all or part of the
CCIV's business that is registered as a sub-fund of the CCIV by ASIC.

Corporate Collective Investment Vehicle (CCIV) sub-fund trust
For taxation purposes, a CCIV sub-fund is taken to be a separate unit trust with both:
•   the CCIV as trustee
•   members of the CCIV as beneficiaries, of the CCIV sub-fund trust in accordance with
    their shareholding that is referable to the sub-fund.

Each CCIV sub-fund trust is subject to the existing rules for the taxation of trusts.

Cost base
The cost base of an asset is generally what the asset costs you. The cost base is made up
of 5 elements:

151. money you paid, or property you gave, for the asset

152. incidental costs of acquiring or selling the asset (for example, brokerage and stamp
    duty)

153. costs of owning the asset (generally this won't apply to shares or units because you'll
    usually have claimed or be entitled to claim these costs as tax deductions)

154.    costs associated with either
    –    increasing or preserving the value of the asset
    –    installing or moving the asset

155. costs to preserve or defend your title or rights to the asset, such as you paying for a
    call on shares.


Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                 228
You may need to reduce the cost base for a share or unit by the amount of any non-
assessable payment you receive from the company or fund.

Debt forgiveness
A debt is forgiven if you're freed from the obligation to pay it. A commercial debt that is
forgiven may reduce your capital loss, your cost base or your reduced cost base.

Demerger
A demerger involves the restructuring of a corporate or trust group by splitting its
operations into 2 or more entities or groups. Under a demerger, the owners of the head
entity of the group acquire a direct interest in the demerged entity that was formerly part of
the group.

Demerger exemption
A demerger exemption applies to disregard certain capital gains or capital losses made by a
demerging entity in a demerger group. A demerger group comprises the head entity of a
group of companies or trusts and at least one demerger subsidiary. Discretionary trusts and
super funds can't be members of a demerger group.

Demerger roll-over
A demerger roll-over may apply to CGT events that happened on or after 1 July 2002 to
interests that you own in the head entity of a demerger group where a company or trust is
demerged from the group. Generally, the head entity undertaking the demerger will advise
owners whether demerger roll-over is available but you should seek our advice if you're in
any doubt. We may have provided advice in the form of a class ruling on a specific
demerger, confirming that the roll-over is available.

This roll-over allows you to defer your CGT obligation until a later CGT event happens to
your original or your new shares or units.

Demutualisation
A company demutualises when it changes its membership interests to shares. If you
received shares as part of a demutualisation of an Australian insurance company (for
example, AMP, IOOF or NRMA), you're not subject to CGT until you sell the shares or
another CGT event happens.

Usually, the company will advise you of your cost base for the shares you received. The
company may give you the choice of keeping the shares they have given you or of selling
them and giving you the capital proceeds.

Depreciating assets
A depreciating asset is an asset that has a limited effective life and can reasonably be
expected to decline in value over the time it is used. Depreciating assets include items such
as computers, tools, furniture and motor vehicles.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                  229
Land and items of trading stock are specifically excluded from the definition of depreciating
asset, as are most intangible assets such as options, rights and goodwill.

Discount method
The discount method is one of the ways to calculate your capital gain if:
•   the CGT event happened after 11:45 am AEST on 21 September 1999
•   you acquired the asset at least 12 months before the CGT event.

If you use the discount method, you don't index the cost base. First, reduce your capital
gains by the amount of any capital losses made in the year and any unapplied net capital
losses from earlier years. You then apply the discount to any remaining capital gain.

If you acquired the asset before 11:45 am AEST on 21 September 1999, you may be able to
choose either the discount method or the indexation method, whichever gives you the
better result.

Discounted capital gain
A discounted capital gain is a capital gain that has been reduced by the CGT discount. If you
received the discounted capital gain from a managed fund you'll need to gross up the
amount before you apply any capital losses and then the CGT discount.

Disposal of assets by a trust to a company
You can apply a roll-over if a trust restructures and disposes of all of its assets to a
company and the units or interests in the trust are replaced by shares in the company. This
roll-over isn't available for a restructure undertaken by a discretionary trust.

Disposal or creation of assets in a wholly-owned company
If you're an individual or a trustee, you can choose to obtain a roll-over to defer the capital
gain if:
•   you dispose of a CGT asset, or all the assets of a business, to a company in which you
    own all the shares, or you create a CGT asset in such a company
•   all the partners in a partnership dispose of partnership property to a company in which
    they all own shares or the partners create a CGT asset in such a company.

Dividend reinvestment plans
Under dividend reinvestment plans, shareholders can choose to have their dividend used to
acquire additional shares in the company instead of receiving a cash payment. For CGT
purposes, you're treated as if you received a cash dividend and then used it to buy
additional shares. Each share (or parcel of shares) received in this way is treated as a
separate asset when the shares are issued to you.

Dwelling
A dwelling is anything that is used wholly or mainly for residential accommodation. Examples
of a dwelling are a home, an apartment, a strata title unit or a unit in a retirement village.


Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                 230
Early stage innovation company
You may be entitled to the early stage investor tax incentives for eligible investments you
make in an early stage innovation company (ESIC). A company will qualify as an ESIC if it
meets both:
•   the early stage test
•   either the
    –    100-point innovation test
    –    Principles-based innovation test.

For more information, see Qualifying as an early stage innovation company.

Employee share schemes
Employee share schemes (ESS) give employees benefits such as shares or the opportunity
to buy shares (such as rights or options) in the company they work for at a discounted price.
These benefits are known as ESS interests. In most cases, ESS interests are exempt from
CGT implications until the discount on the ESS interest has been taxed. When you sell your
ESS interests (or resulting shares), they are taxed under the CGT rules (or if you're a share
trader, the trading stock rules).

For more information, see Employee share schemes.

Exchange of rights or options
You may apply a roll-over to defer the capital gain when you exchange rights or options to
acquire shares in a company or units in a unit trust.

This roll-over is a type of replacement asset roll-over.

Exchange of share in one company for share in another company
You may apply a roll-over to defer the capital gain when you exchange shares in one
company for shares in an interposed company.

This roll-over is a type of replacement asset roll-over.

Exchange of shares or units
A roll-over may be chosen to defer the capital gain if you exchange shares in the same
company or units in the same unit trust.

This roll-over is a type of replacement asset roll-over.

Exchange of units in a unit trust for share in a company
You can apply a roll-over to defer the capital gain when you exchange units in a unit trust for
shares in a company due to a reorganisation.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                  231
Excluded foreign resident
An excluded foreign resident is a person who, at the time of the CGT event, is a foreign
resident and has been a foreign resident for tax purposes for a continuous period of more
than 6 years.

Extra capital gain
A beneficiary of a trust who has a share of a capital gain that was included in the net income
of the trust for tax purposes, will include an amount of extra capital gain when working out
their own net capital gain. The amount of extra capital gain will depend on the beneficiary's
share of a capital gain, the amount of the taxable income of the trust that relates to the
beneficiary's share of the capital gain and whether any discounts or concessions were
applied by the trustee when working out the amount of the capital gain for tax purposes.

For more information, see Trusts.

Foreign resident capital gains withholding
For foreign residents who entered into transactions from 1 July 2017 onwards, a withholding
obligation applies to the disposal of:
•   taxable Australian real property
•   an indirect Australian real property interest
•   an option or right to acquire such property or such an interest.

For more information, see Foreign resident capital gains withholding.

Gross up
Grossing up applies to beneficiaries or unit holders who are entitled to a share of trust
income that includes a capital gain reduced by the CGT discount. In this case, you ‘gross up’
your capital gain by multiplying by 2 your share of any discounted capital gain received from
the trust. You may also have to gross up a capital gain that was reduced by the small
business 50% active asset reduction.

Income year
An income year is the period covered by your tax return, generally 1 July to the next
30 June. However, in particular circumstances, the Commissioner may allow a company or
other entity to adopt a different 12-month period for their income year.

Indexation factor
The indexation factor is worked out based on the consumer price index (CPI) at Appendix 2.

The indexation of the cost base of an asset is frozen on 30 September 1999. For CGT
events after that time, the indexation factor is the CPI for the September 1999 quarter
(68.7), divided by the CPI for the quarter in which you incurred costs relating to the asset.
The result is taken to 3 decimal places rounding up if the 4th decimal place is 5 or more.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                232
Indexation method
The indexation method is one of the ways to calculate your capital gain if you acquired a
CGT asset before 11:45 am AEST on 21 September 1999. This method allows you to
increase the cost base by applying an indexation factor (based on increases in the
consumer price index up to September 1999).

You can't use the indexation method for:
•   CGT assets acquired after 11:45 am AEST on 21 September 1999
•   expenditure relating to a CGT asset acquired after 11:45 am AEST on 21 September
    1999.

For CGT events after 11:45 am AEST on 21 September 1999 the discount method may give
you the better result.

Inter-company asset roll-over
A same asset roll-over is available where a company transfers or creates (CGT event) a CGT
asset in another company that is a member of the same wholly-owned group, but one of the
companies is a non-resident.

Legal personal representative
A legal personal representative can be either:
•   the executor of a deceased estate (that is, a person appointed to wind up the estate in
    accordance with the will)
•   an administrator appointed to wind up the estate if the person doesn't leave a will.

LIC capital gain amount
An LIC capital gain amount is an amount notionally included in a dividend from a listed
investment company (LIC) which represents a capital gain made by that company. The
amount isn't included as a capital gain in the supplementary tax return. See the Individual
tax return instructions 2026 for how to return an LIC capital gain.

Main residence
Your main residence is your home, that is, the dwelling you regard as your main place of
residence and nominate as such for any CGT concessions dealing with the disposal of a
main residence.

For more information, see Is the dwelling your main residence?

Main residence exemption
Generally, you can disregard a capital gain or capital loss from a CGT event that happens to
a dwelling that is your main residence (also referred to as ‘your home’). Subject to certain
conditions, you may not be able to disregard a capital gain or capital loss if:
•   you have used your home to produce income
•   your home wasn't your main residence for the full period you owned it

Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                  233
•   you were an excluded foreign resident at the time you sold your main residence
•   the land around your home is more than 2 hectares.

Managed fund
A managed fund is a unit trust. The types of managed funds available include cash
management trusts, fixed interest trusts, mortgage trusts, property trusts, equity trusts,
international trusts and diversified trusts. Attribution managed investment trusts (AMITs)
and attribution corporate collective investment vehicle (CCIV) sub-fund trusts, have
separate tax rules.

Managed investment trust
A trust is a managed investment trust (MIT) if:
•   the trustee of the trust is an Australian resident, or the central management and control
    of the trust is in Australia
•   the trust doesn't carry on or control an active trading business
•   the trust is a managed investment scheme under section 9 of the Corporations Act 2001
•   the trust is sufficiently widely-held and not closely-held (special counting rules apply
    where investors in a MIT are specified widely held entities)
•   the trust is operated or managed by an appropriately regulated entity.

Market value substitution rule for capital proceeds
In some cases, if you receive nothing in exchange for a CGT asset (for example, if you give it
away as a gift) you're taken to have received the market value of the asset at the time of the
CGT event. You may also be taken to have received the market value if your capital
proceeds are more or less than the market value of the CGT asset, and you and the
purchaser weren't dealing with each other at arm’s length in connection with the event.

You're said to be dealing at arm’s length with someone if each party acts independently and
neither party exercises influence or control over the other in connection with the
transaction. The law looks at not only the relationship between the parties but also the
quality of the bargaining between them.

Market value substitution rule for cost base and reduced cost base
In some cases, the general rules for calculating the cost base and reduced cost base have
to be modified. For example, the market value may be substituted for the first element of
the cost base and reduced cost base if one of the following applies:
•   you didn't incur expenditure to acquire the asset
•   some or all of the expenditure you incurred can't be valued
•   you didn't deal at arm’s length with the previous owner in acquiring the asset.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                   234
Net capital gain
A net capital gain is the difference between your total capital gains for the year and the total
of your capital losses for the year and unapplied net capital losses from earlier years, less
any CGT discount and small business CGT concessions to which you're entitled.

Net capital loss
A net capital loss occurs when your total capital losses for the year are more than your total
capital gains for the year. This loss can be carried forward and deducted from capital gains
you make in later years. There is no time limit on how long you can carry forward a net
capital loss.

Capital losses from collectables can only be used to reduce capital gains from collectables.
If your total capital losses from collectables for the year are more than your total capital
gains from collectables, you have a net capital loss from collectables for the year. This loss
is carried forward and deducted from capital gains from collectables in later years. There is
no time limit on how long you can carry forward a net capital loss from a collectable.

Non-assessable payment
A non-assessable payment is a payment received from a company, trust or fund that isn't
assessed as part of your income in your tax return.

This includes some distributions from unit trusts, managed funds and companies.

'Other' method
To calculate your capital gain using the 'other' method, you subtract your cost base from
your capital proceeds. You must use this method for any CGT assets, including shares or
units, you have bought and sold within 12 months (that is, when the indexation and discount
methods don't apply).

Other CGT assets and any other CGT events
Other CGT assets refers to the capital gain or capital loss that you have made and that
doesn't fit into any of the more specific categories listed at item 1 of the CGT schedule –
such as the disposal of your forestry interests in a forestry managed investment scheme or
hedging financial arrangements.

Other exemptions and roll-overs
Other exemptions and roll-overs are exemptions and roll-overs that you have applied that
aren't listed in one of the more specific codes under the question 'Have you applied an
exemption or roll-over?' of the individual supplementary tax return or your entity's tax return.

Other real estate
Other real estate on the CGT schedule refers to any real estate including land and buildings
that are situated outside of Australia, for example, a rental property situated in the United
States.



Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                235
Other shares
Other shares on the CGT schedule are shares that aren't listed on an Australian securities
exchange, such as privately held shares or shares listed on a foreign securities exchange,
but not also on an Australian securities exchange, for example, shares listed on the New
York Stock Exchange (NYSE).

Other units
Other units on the CGT schedule are units in a unit trust that aren't listed on an Australian
securities exchange, such as privately held units or units listed on a foreign securities
exchange, but not also on an Australian securities exchange, for example, units listed on the
NYSE.

Ownership interest
You have an ownership interest if you own a dwelling or land. For other circumstances
where you may have an ownership interest, see What is an ownership interest?

Post-CGT asset
Post-CGT assets are assets acquired on or after 20 September 1985.

Pre-CGT asset
Pre-CGT assets are assets acquired before 20 September 1985. They're generally exempt
from CGT. An exception occurs where CGT event K6 applies.

Prior year net capital losses
See Unapplied net capital losses.

Real estate situated in Australia
Real estate situated in Australia is any real property, including land and buildings, that is in
Australia.

Reduced cost base
The reduced cost base is the amount you take into account when you're working out
whether you have made a capital loss when a CGT event happened.

The reduced cost base may need to have amounts deducted from it such as non-
assessable payments.

The reduced cost base doesn't include indexation or costs of owning the asset such as
interest on monies borrowed to buy it.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                   236
Replacement asset roll-overs
A replacement asset roll-over may apply to defer the capital gain when you replace an asset
in certain circumstances.

For more information, see Other exemptions and roll-overs.

Roll-over
A roll-over allows a capital gain to be deferred or disregarded until a later CGT event
happens.

Same asset roll-over
A same asset roll-over allows a capital gain that you make to be deferred when you transfer
or dispose of assets in certain circumstances.

For more information, see Other exemptions and roll-overs.

Scrip for scrip roll-over
A scrip for scrip roll-over can apply to CGT events that happened on or after 10 December
1999 in the case of a takeover or merger of a company or fund in which you have holdings.
The company or fund would usually advise you if the roll-over conditions have been
satisfied.

This roll-over allows you to defer your CGT obligation until a later CGT event happens to
your shares or units.

You may only be eligible for partial roll-over if you received shares (or units) plus cash for
your original shares. In that case, if the information provided by the company or fund isn't
sufficient for you to calculate your capital gain, you may need to seek advice from us.

Share buy-back
Some of the buy-back price may have been treated as a dividend for tax purposes (for buy-
backs announced by listed public companies before 25 October 2022, and for buy-backs
completed before and after that date by other companies). The time you make the capital
gain or capital loss will depend on the conditions of the particular buy-back offer.

Shares in companies listed on an Australian securities exchange
Shares in companies listed on an Australian securities exchange don't include shares in
privately owned companies whose shares aren't publicly traded. For the purposes of the
CGT schedule, Include shares in privately owned companies under Other Shares.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                     237
Small business CGT concessions
There are 4 small business CGT concessions available where certain conditions are
satisfied. They're, the:
•   small business 15-year exemption
•   small business 50% active asset reduction
•   small business retirement exemption
•   small business roll-over.

These concessions apply to CGT events that happened after 11:45 am AEST on
21 September 1999.

In addition to the 4 small business CGT concessions, there is a small business restructure
roll-over allowing the transfer of active assets – including CGT assets – from one entity to
another, on or after 1 July 2016, without incurring an income tax liability.

For more information, see Small business CGT concessions.

Specifically entitled
A beneficiary that is specifically entitled to the whole or part of a capital gain made by the
trust will be assessable on the amount of the net (taxable) income of the trust that relates to
that gain.

Generally, a beneficiary will be taken to be specifically entitled to an amount of a capital gain
if:
•   they have received or are likely to receive the benefit of that capital gain
•   the entitlement is recorded in the accounts or records of the trust within 2 months after
    the end of the income year.

Spouse
Your 'spouse' includes another person who:
•   you were in a relationship with that was registered under a prescribed state or territory
    law
•   although not legally married to you, lived with you on a genuine domestic basis in a
    relationship as a couple.

Takeovers and mergers
If a company in which you held shares was taken over or merged and you received new
shares in the takeover or merged company, you may be entitled to a scrip for scrip roll-over.

If the scrip for scrip conditions weren't satisfied, your capital proceeds for your original
shares is the total of any cash and of the market value of the new shares you received.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                   238
Tax-advantaged entity
A tax-advantaged entity is a tax-exempt entity, or a foreign resident, or the trustee of:
•   a complying super fund
•   a complying approved deposit fund
•   a pooled super fund.

Unapplied net capital losses from earlier years
Unapplied net capital losses from earlier years is the amount of net capital losses from
earlier years remaining after you have deducted the capital gain made between the year
when the losses were made and the current income year.

To reduce capital gains in the current year, use unapplied net capital losses from earlier
years (after first taking out from the current year capital gain any current year capital
losses).

To reduce capital gains from collectables in the current year, you can use only the unapplied
net capital losses from collectables from earlier years.

Unit trust
A unit trust is a trust or fund that is divided into units representing capital and income
entitlements. Units may be traded or redeemed (including switching and transferring units).
A managed fund is a type of unit trust.

Units in unit trusts listed on an Australian securities exchange
Units in unit trusts listed on an Australian securities exchange don't include units in private
equity trusts or family trusts, whereby the trust is established for the benefit of one or more
ascertainable beneficiaries, rather than for the promotion of the welfare of the general
public or for the advancement of a cause. For the purposes of the CGT schedule, include
units in a private trust under Other units.




Australian Taxation Office   Guide to capital gains tax 2026                                 239
