                                                   Print whole section



Income, deductions, offsets and
records
What income you need to declare, deductions and offsets
you can claim and records you need to prove your claims.



  Income you must declare
  Work out which income you need to declare in your tax return,
  such as employment, government and investment income.




  Deductions you can claim
  Find out which expenses you can claim as income tax deductions
  and work out the amount to claim.




  Tax offsets
  Check whether you will receive a tax offset and how to calculate
  it.




  Records you need to keep
  Records you need to show a payment or expense, the format to
  keep your records in, and how long to keep them.




  Income tests
   What income is used to work out your eligibility for some tax
   offsets and benefits.



   Guides for occupations and industries
   Occupation and industry guides on income and allowances to
   declare and the expenses you can claim a deduction for.




QC 72086



Records you need to keep
Records you need to show a payment or expense, the
format to keep your records in, and how long to keep them.

Last updated 8 June 2026




What is a record?
A record is something that provides evidence of the income you’ve
earned or the expenses you’ve made. They can be paper or electronic,
and include:

   written evidence from a supplier (like a receipt or invoice)

   spreadsheets or timesheets (where you enter information)

   logbooks (for example, to document work-related car use)

   diary or calendar entries

   employment contracts or agreements, duty statements or letter
   from your employer (in some cases).

The type of records you need will depend on what they are for. Find
out what records you need for:

   Work-related expenses

   Other deductible expenses

   Payments or amounts you receive

   Investments and assets
Work-related expenses
Work-related expenses are the expenses you incur while earning your
salary and wages.

To claim a deduction for a work-related expense, you must:

  check you're eligible to claim the expense

  have written evidence, such as a receipt or invoice, that shows the

     cost of the item or service

     name of the supplier

     nature of the expense

     date you buy or pay for the expense

     date the written evidence was prepared

  have a record that shows how the expense relates to earning your
  income, for example, a note or similar document explaining

     how you calculated the amount of your claim

     your work-related versus private use (you can only claim the
     work-related portion).

A bank or credit card statement on its own isn’t written evidence
because it isn’t from the supplier and generally doesn’t include all the
information required.

There are some specific exceptions from keeping records for certain
work expenses, see record keeping exceptions

For information about records you need for work-related expenses,
see:

  Clothing, laundry and dry-cleaning expenses

  Computers, laptops and software

  Expenses for a car you own or lease

  Expenses for a vehicle that isn't yours or isn't a car

  Home phone and internet expenses

  Keeping records for depreciating assets

  Keeping travel expense records
  Mobile phone, mobile internet and other devices

  Overtime meal expenses

  Self-education expenses

  Working from home expenses - Actual costs method

  Working from home expenses - Fixed rate method

  Taxi, ride-share and public transport expenses

  Tools and equipment to perform your work

For a summary of work-related expense records, download Keeping
records for work-related expenses (PDF, 543KB) .


Other deductible expenses
If you claim a deduction for a deductible expense, you must have
records. Examples include the cost of managing your tax affairs or
gifts and donations you make to a deductible gift recipient.

For most expenses you need a receipt or similar document as evidence
of your expenses.

For information about specific records you need for gifts and
donations, see Keeping records of gifts and donations.

Record for local government councillors
If you received an allowance from a council where you're a councillor,
you need to keep written evidence of the work-related and car
expenses you incur in carrying out your duties as a councillor.
Expenses which allow you to maintain a public profile as local
government councillors are deductible.


Payments or amounts you receive
If you receive income or other payment amounts you need to declare
in your tax return, you need records that show the amounts. You may
need to provide us a copy of the records if we review a tax return you
lodge.

For salary, wages, allowances, government payments or pensions and
annuities you receive, your records may include:
  your income statement if your employer reports to us through single
  touch payroll (STP)

  your Pay as you go (PAYG) payment summary – individual non-
  business

  a signed letter or statement from your payer, that provides the same
  information as an income statement or payment summary

  your PAYG payment summary – superannuation income stream.

For assessable investment income from interest, divided and
distributions from managed funds, your records may include:

  interest, dividends or distributions statements

  Standard Distribution Statement (SDS) and Attribution managed
  investment trust member annual (AMMA) statement, that shows

     the amount of your distribution

     the amount of any primary production or non-primary production
     income

     any capital gains or losses

     any foreign income

     your share of any credits, such as franking credits.


Investments and assets
If you acquire a capital asset you may make a capital gain or capital
loss if you later sell the asset. To ensure you don’t pay more tax than
necessary, keep good records from when you buy the asset.

This may include income you receive from an investment property or
dividends from shares.

For information about the records you need for investments and
assets, see:

  Keeping records of shares and units

  Records for rental properties and holiday homes

  Keeping records for property – your main residence and inherited
  dwellings

  Keeping crypto records
The importance of keeping records
Australia's tax system relies on self-assessment so we accept that the
information you give us is accurate. If we review your tax return and
you don't have evidence to support claims for a deduction, your claims
can be disallowed (taken off your tax return).

Keeping good records helps you and your tax adviser:

  to provide written evidence of your income and expenses

  prepare your tax return

  ensure you're able to claim all your entitlements

  prove the information you provide in your tax return (in case we ask
  you)

  reduce the risk of tax audits and adjustments

  improve communication with us

  resolve issues that relate to a dispute of your assessments or
  adjustments

  avoid exposure to penalties.

Keeping good records reduces the cost of managing your tax affairs. If
you use a tax advisor, you can reduce the time they spend sorting and
preparing your records. This will give them more time to ensure you
claim your entitlements.

If you incur expenses that you use partly for private purposes, you
must have records that show how you worked out the part of
expenses that you incur in earning assessable income.

For more information, see PS LA 2005/2 Penalty for failure to keep or
retain records.


How long to keep your records
You must keep your written evidence for 5 years from the date you
lodge your tax return.

In limited circumstances, there are different time periods for keeping
records or record keeping exceptions.

In the following situations the period for keeping records is:
  5 years from the date of your last claim for decline in value, if you
  claim a deduction for the decline in value of depreciating assets

  5 years after it is certain that no capital gains tax (CGT) event can
  happen, if you acquire or dispose of a CGT asset

  for the later of the following periods if you're in dispute with us,
  either

     5 years from the date you lodge your tax return

     5 years from the date the dispute is resolved.


Format of your records
You can keep your records in paper or electronic format, including
photos of your written evidence. If you make paper or electronic
copies of your records, they must be a true and clear copy of the
original record.

Your records must be in English where you incur the expense in
Australia. However, if you incur the expense in a country outside
Australia, the document can be in the language of that country. If we
ask you for records to substantiate a claim and your record is not in
English, it should be accompanied by a translation certified by an
authorised translation service. This includes professional translation
services accredited by the National Accreditation Authority for
Translators and Interpreters Ltd (NAATI) .

You can use any electronic device or app to keep your electronic
records. However, we recommend backing up your electronic records
regularly.


Keeping records with myDeductions
Our myDeductions tool in the ATO app is a record-keeping tool you can
use to keep track of your records electronically.

Using the myDeductions tool makes keeping your records including
photos easier.

We recognise documents you store digitally, including photos of your
receipts as records.

Sole traders with simple affairs can also use it to help keep track of
their business income and expenses.
You can upload your records from the myDeductions tool and pre-fill
your tax return in myTax. If you use a registered tax agent, you can
also email your records directly to them.

The myDeductions tool allows you to keep your records for:

  all work-related expenses (including car trips)

  interest and dividend deductions

  gifts or donations

  costs of managing tax affairs

  sole trader expenses and business income

  other deductions.


Media: A quick demonstration of myDeductions
https://tv.ato.gov.au/ato-tv/media?v=bd1bdiubgosm84        (Duration:
1:22)


Record keeping exceptions
There are also some record keeping exceptions available to make
things simpler.

Exceptions don’t allow you to claim an automatic deduction.

In limited circumstances we may also grant relief from the effects of
failing to keep records.

In some circumstances you may not need receipts, but you still need
to show you spent the money and how you calculate your claim.

Specific exceptions are:


  Total work-related expenses $300 or less

  Total laundry expenses $150 or less

  Small expense receipts

  Hard to get receipts

  Record keeping exceptions for travel allowance expenses

  Record keeping exception for overtime meals
Total work-related expenses $300 or less
If your total claim for work-related expenses is $300 or less, you can
claim a deduction without full written evidence (receipts) as long as
you can show:

  you spent the money

  how you calculated the amount of your claim.

For example, the amounts highlighted on a bank statement with a
written description of each item, and how they directly related to your
work.

The $300 deduction limit for work-related expenses does not apply to
claims for:

  car expenses

  meal allowances

  award transport payments allowance

  travel allowance expenses

These are claimed separately and have their own record-keeping rules.

If your total claim for work-related expenses is more than $300, you
must have full written evidence to support all your claims.


Total laundry expenses $150 or less
If your total claim for work-related laundry expenses is $150 or less
(excluding dry-cleaning expenses), you can claim a deduction without
full written evidence (such as a receipt).

However, you will need to keep a record (like a spreadsheet or note in
your phone) that shows you spent the money on laundering work-
related clothing and how you work out the amount of your laundry
claim.

As long as your claim doesn’t exceed $150, it can be worked out by:

  $1 per load (if you wash only your work clothes in that load)

  50 cents per load (if you mix other clothes in with your work
  clothes).
  Example: laundry expenses
  Jelani receives a work uniform from her employer. She washes,
  dries and irons her uniforms separate to personal items, 2 times
  per week.

  Jelani works 48 weeks during the year, meaning she does 96
  laundry loads for her work uniform per year. She documents this
  in the notes app of her phone.

  Jelani can claim $96 for laundry expenses. Her claim of $96 is
  worked out as follows:

  Total number of claimable laundry loads × Reasonable cost per
  load = Total claim amount

  96 × $1 = $96


If your total claim for laundry expenses is more than $150, you must
have full written evidence (receipts) to support all of your claims.

Note: This $150 limit for laundry is included in the $300 for total work-
related expenses. It does not increase the amount of expenses you
can claim without receipts to $450.

For more information, see Keeping records for clothing, laundry and
dry-cleaning.


Small expense receipts
Small expenses are expenses you incur that are $10 or less.

If you're unable to get a receipt from a supplier, you may still be able to
claim a deduction for small expenses if you keep a record (such as a
diary note or note in your phone). Your total claim for an income year
for small expenses must be $200 or less if you record them in this way.

Your record must be made as soon as possible after incurring the
expense and provide details of the:

  name or business name of the supplier

  amount of the expense or cost of the asset

  nature of the goods or services you buy

  date you buy the goods or services
  date the record was made.

If the expense is the decline in value of a depreciating asset you must
record:

  a description of the asset

  the amount of decline in value

  who made the record

  the date the record was made.


Hard to get receipts
If you incur expenses where it is hard to get receipt, you can make a
record (such as a diary note or note in your phone) of the expenses
instead of getting a document from the supplier. Hard to get receipt
expenses are excluded from the $200 limit for small expenses.

The record you keep must be made as soon as possible after the
expense is incurred and provide details of the:

  name or business name of the supplier

  amount of the expense or cost of the asset

  nature of the goods or services you buy

  date you buy the goods or services

  date the record was made.


Record keeping relief
We may also grant relief from the effects of failing to keep records in
limited circumstances.

Specific circumstances where relief from the effects of failing to keep
records include:

  Unable to get a receipt from the supplier

  Reasonable expectation that records weren't required

  Lost or destroyed records

Unable to get a receipt from the supplier
We may grant you relief from keeping records, if the nature and quality
of your evidence shows you spent the money and are entitled to claim
a deduction.

Your evidence may include:

  a bank or credit card statement that shows

     the amount that was paid

     when and to who amounts were paid

A bank or credit card statement is not sufficient evidence on its own,
you also need:

  other documents that outline the nature of the goods or services

  a written record in your work diary.

If you pay cash to a supplier and have no other documents to support
your claim, you will not have sufficient evidence to claim a deduction.


Reasonable expectation that records weren't
required
If you don't have the records you need to claim a deduction, we may
grant relief from substantiation (keeping records) if:

  there is sufficient evidence to indicate that you incurred the
  expense and it is deductible

  you can show the only reason you didn't keep records was a
  genuine belief that you did not need to keep records

  your belief that you did not have to keep records was reasonable in
  all the circumstances.

Relief will not be granted if you did not keep records because:

  you don't know how the record keeping provisions operate

  you have carelessly or recklessly disregarded whether an exception
  would apply.

For example, if you were under the impression that you only had to
provide records for work expenses greater than $300, the relief from
keeping records for the first $300 of expenses would not be granted.

Lost or destroyed records
If your records are accidentally lost or destroyed, you may be able to
claim a deduction for certain expenses. For example, your records are
stolen during a burglary, destroyed in a disaster or due to
circumstances of vulnerability such as sudden homelessness, or
experiencing family violence.

You can claim a deduction, if you can provide a complete copy of the
lost or destroyed records – you can treat these records as the original
from the time of the loss or destruction.

If you're unable to get a complete copy or a substitute document that
meets all the original requirements for the record, we may also grant
relief from substantiation (keeping records). This may occur where:

  there is sufficient evidence to indicate that you incurred the
  expense and it is deductible

  you can provide evidence that the loss or destruction of your
  records occurred

  documents have been lost or destroyed despite your taking
  reasonable precautions

  you have tried and get a substitute record that meets all the original
  requirements for the record, and

     you can show you made an effort, or there were reasonable
     grounds to believe your efforts wouldn't be successful, to get a
     substitute document

     it was not reasonably possible for you to get a substitute
     document.

We may also be able to help you with Reconstructing your tax records.

For more information on the relief from the effects of a failure to
substantiate expenses, see TR 97/24 Income tax: relief from the
effects of failing to substantiate.



  Example: Documents not available
  Kylie's 2025–26 income tax return is being audited, Kylie is asked
  to provide substantiation for her work-related expenses.

  Kylie provides the auditor with a copy of an Apprehended
  Violence Order (AVO) that was recently applied for by Police and
  lists Kylie as the person-in-need-of-protection (PINOP) and her
  ex-spouse as the defendant. The AVO outlines a 'grounds of
  application' which the case officer relies on to demonstrate that
  a domestic violence incident was reported to Police in February
  2026. Kylie also provides a letter from an emergency shelter
  outlining that she needed to leave home in February 2026 due to
  domestic violence. Kylie explains she has not been able to return
  to her former residence since this incident due to ongoing fears
  for her safety.

  Kylie requests discretion for her substantiation from July 2025 to
  February 2026.

  There is sufficient evidence that:

    Kylie's expenses were incurred and are deductible, based on
    bank statements and a letter from her employer outlining her
    work arrangements.

    Kylie took reasonable precautions to prevent the loss or
    destruction of records.

    Kylie made a genuine effort to obtain substitute records.

    It was not safe or feasible for Kylie to obtain original
    documentation.

  Substantiation requirements are met for the March 2026 to June
  2026 period, as original records are available and provided.

  The auditor allows the discretion for lost or destroyed records.




  Documents to support and verify your
  claims
  Check what documents you may need to provide us to verify the
  amounts you claim in your tax return.




QC 72206
Documents to support and verify
your claims
Check what documents you may need to provide us to
verify the amounts you claim in your tax return.

Last updated 29 July 2026




If you need to provide supporting
documents
If we ask you to provide supporting documents:

   read this page to find out what supporting documents you need to
   provide for each claim type

   send us copies of the relevant documents.

Ensure copies you provide are clear and readable, otherwise we may
ask you to provide them again. We are unable to return copies of
documents to you.

Don't send your original documents to us. Don’t provide a USB device
as it will delay the processing of your audit. You may be requested to
provide original documents to us at a later date.


Keeping your tax records
If an expense is subject to substantiation, it must be supported by
particular forms of written evidence – if not, your claim is not
deductible. In other cases, you need to provide sufficient evidence to
satisfy us that you incurred the expense.

Generally, you need to keep your records for 5 years from the date you
lodge your tax return.

We request you provide enough information in a format that helps us to
complete our review of your tax return.

A bank or credit card statement is not an acceptable record on its own.

For more information on the format of your records and how long to
keep them, see Records you need to keep.
Making a voluntary disclosure
If you make a voluntary disclosure, you can generally expect a
reduction in the administrative penalties and interest charges that
would normally apply. Administrative penalties are those we may
impose without taking court action.


Types of income
Read about supporting documents you need to provide for the
following types of income:

  Salary or wages

  Allowances

  Australian Government allowances and payments

  Australian Government pensions and allowances

  Attributed personal services income

  Gross interest

  Dividends


Salary or wages
Provide the following supporting documents for your salary or wages:

  your employer’s name and address

  the name and contact phone number of your manager or payroll or
  accounting area (at your employer)

  a copy of your original payment summary issued by your employer
  (if there is no end-of-year income statement in ATO online services
  in myGov).

If you did not receive an original payment summary, and there is no
end-of-year income statement in ATO online services in myGov,
provide as many of the following additional items as possible:

  copies of your original bank statements showing the deposits of
  payments from your employer

  copies of original payslips you received showing your income and
  tax withheld
  copies of any other original documents or information that may help
  us verify the employment information on your tax return – for
  example, a statutory declaration.

If you receive Foreign Employment Income you need to provide
evidence of foreign tax paid.

The following documents are acceptable evidence of the payment of
foreign tax:

  a statement from the foreign tax authority setting out the
  particulars that would normally be recorded on a notice of
  assessment, or a similar official receipt

  or other document evidencing payment of foreign income tax.

If the foreign notice has no provision for a cash register receipt,
taxpayers will be required to provide a separate receipt to indicate that
the foreign tax liability has been paid. A notice of assessment which
does not show that the foreign tax has been paid is not sufficient proof
that the tax shown on such a notice has been paid.

If you are unable to provide all of these documents, or if you are an
associate of your payer, we may need to seek further information from
you.

Allowances
Provide the following supporting documents for your allowances:

  your employer’s name and address

  the name and contact phone number of your manager (at your
  employer)

  copies of your original payment summary issued by your employer
  (if there is no end-of-year income statement in ATO online services
  in myGov).

If you did not receive an original payment summary, provide copies of
original payslips you received showing your allowances and tax
withheld.

We also require a breakdown and description of all the allowances you
received, including:

  how much the allowance was
  what expenses the allowance was paid to cover

  a copy of the employment contract, award or workplace or
  enterprise bargaining agreement the allowance is paid under.

If you are unable to provide all of these documents, or if you are an
associate of your payer, we may need to seek further information from
you.


Australian Government allowances and payments
Provide copies of your original payment summaries and any other
documents to show all of the taxable Government payments and
allowances you received and any overpayments you have repaid for
the income year.


Australian Government pensions and allowances
Provide copies of your original payment summaries and documents to
show all of the taxable Government pensions and payments you
received and any overpayments you have repaid for the income year.

Attributed personal services income
Provide the following supporting documents for your attributed
personal services income:

  the name and contact phone number of the person who paid you

  a copy of your original payment summary – business and personal
  services income showing the amount of personal services income
  attributed to you and the total amount of tax paid or withheld

  details of any other personal services income attributed to you for
  the personal services you provided.

If you can't provide any of these, provide the following:

  copies of original bank statements showing the deposits of
  payments from the person who paid you

  copies of any other original documents or information that may help
  us verify the information on your tax return.


Gross interest
For any interest paid or credited to your account from any source in
Australia including:

  accounts and term deposits held with financial institutions

  interest from children's accounts you opened or operated with
  funds that belonged to you or funds that you used as if they
  belonged to you.

Interest does not include any interest credited to a first home saver
account.

What you need to provide when contacted about your interest claim:

  If the interest income shown in our letter is not correct or does not
  belong to you personally, you should provide information and
  documents to support your position, including copies of your
  account statements.

  If the interest has been declared in an associated return – for
  example, a partnership, trust, company or superannuation fund –
  give us the details.

You should also ask the bank to record that tax file number (TFN)
against the accounts. This will help us to match the interest to the
correct tax return in future years.

Dividends
What you need to provide supporting documents for your dividends:

  a copy of all dividend statements from the Australian company of
  the dividends that were paid to you (either solely or jointly) or had
  made distributions to you during the income year – these include
  dividends applied under a dividend reinvestment plan and bonus
  shares that qualify as dividends

If you can't provide any of these, provide the following:

  copies of original bank statements showing the deposits of
  payments form the company

  copies of any other original documents or information that may help
  us verify the information on our tax return.

Non-primary production losses carried forward from
earlier income years
What you need to provide:

  details of the type of losses and the income year the loss was made

  a copy of your worksheets showing how you calculated the losses

  documentary evidence to support the losses, such as copies of
  trading statements.

Non-primary production losses claimed this income year
What you need to provide:

  details of why you believe you are entitled to claim a tax loss from
  earlier income years

  details of the type of losses

  a copy of your worksheets showing how you calculated the losses

  documentary evidence to support the losses, such as copies of
  trading statements.


Deductions
This section outlines the supporting documents you need to provide
for:

  Work-related car expenses

  Work-related travel expenses

  Work-related clothing, laundry and dry-cleaning expenses

  Work-related self-education expenses

  Work from home expenses

  Other work-related expenses

  Low-value pool deduction

  Interest deductions

  Dividend deductions

  Gifts or donations

Work-related car expenses
Find out what supporting documents you need to verify your claim
when you use either:

  Cents per kilometre method

  Logbook method

Cents per kilometre method
If you claimed a deduction for car expenses using the cents per
kilometre method, provide the following:

  copies of the car registration certificate or papers if you own the
  car, copies of lease agreement if you leased the car and copies of
  hire purchase agreement if you hired the car

  a record of how you worked out your business kilometres per car,
  per income year – for example, you should advise the

     purpose of the travel undertaken

     frequency of any work-related travel

     number of kilometres travelled for work-related purposes

  if your claim relates to the transport of bulky tools and equipment,
  provide a list of all work items carried, the weight and size – if work
  items are carried in a bag provide the dimensions and weight of the
  bag

  details of the storage available for your tools and equipment at your
  workplace, including details about where it is located, its
  dimensions and whether it can be locked

  any other evidence confirming that the travel claimed was
  undertaken in your car in the course of carrying out your
  employment duties – this could include

     a copy of your job description

     employment contract

     the relevant award or workplace or enterprise bargaining
     agreement.

Common issues
The following are common issues encountered with cents per
kilometre claims:
  claiming 5,000 km without being able to show how you used your
  car to travel 5,000 km for work purposes

  claiming more than 5,000 km for a single vehicle in a single year

  claiming for a car that you do not own, lease or hire under a hire
  purchase agreement

  claiming car expenses (such as running costs) for a car you access
  under a salary sacrifice arrangement or a novated lease

  claiming the home charging rate for electricity expenses for an
  electric or plug-in hybrid electric vehicle in addition to using the all-
  inclusive cents per kilometre rate to claim a deduction

  double dipping, claiming running expenses for the same car in
  addition to using the all-inclusive cents per km rate to claim a
  deduction.

Logbook method
If you claimed a deduction for car expenses using the logbook
method, provide the following:

  details of how your claim was calculated (that is, a description of
  each item included in the claim and the amount claimed for each
  expense)

  copies of the purchase, lease or hire purchase documents for your
  car and copies of the car registration certificate or papers for the
  income years you are claiming car expenses

  the calculation for the decline in value (depreciation)

  copies of your logbook and odometer records – the logbook must
  contain

     when the logbook period begins and ends

     the car’s odometer readings at the start and end of the logbook
     period

     the total number of kilometres the car travelled during the
     logbook period

     the following information for journeys made during the logbook
     period

        day the journey began and ended
     car's odometer readings at the start and end of the journey

     total kilometres travelled

     reason for the journey

  the business-use percentage for the logbook period

  the odometer readings at the start and end of each income year
  you use the logbook method

copies of original receipts for all car expenses claimed

  except for fuel and oil receipts if you have used odometer
  records to estimate your fuel and oil expenses

  including all fuel and oil receipts if you have not used odometer
  records to estimate your fuel and oil expenses

  if your car is a zero emissions vehicle or a plug-in hybrid vehicle
  and you are relying on the home charging rate in Practical
  Compliance Guideline PCG 2024/2 Electric vehicle home
  charging rate – calculating electricity costs when a vehicle is
  charged at an employee’s or individual’s home

     an electricity bill for your residence showing you incurred
     electricity costs, and

     if your vehicle has the functionality to accurately determine
     your home charging percentage, evidence of that percentage
     and receipts for any commercial charging station expenses

if your claim relates to the transport of bulky tools and equipment,
provide

  a list of all work items you carry, the weight and size (if work
  items are carried in a bag provide the dimensions and weight of
  the bag)

  details of the storage available for your tools and equipment at
  your workplace including details about where it is located, its
  dimensions and whether it can be locked

any other evidence confirming that the travel claimed was
undertaken in your car in the course of carrying out your
employment duties – this could include

  a copy of your job description
     employment contract

     the relevant award or workplace or enterprise bargaining
     agreement.

Common issues
The following are common issues encountered with logbook claims:

  A logbook has not been kept or has not been kept correctly – you
  must have a logbook to use the logbook method, even if your
  business use was 100%, or your business use was a fixed pattern.

  Your usage of the vehicle has changed significantly since the
  logbook was kept and a new logbook has not been kept to account
  for this change.

  The number of cars you used for work changed, or you used
  multiple vehicles for work and did not keep concurrent logbooks.

  The opening and closing odometer readings for the period during
  the income year the car was owned, have not been kept.

  The use of the car, both private and for work, during the 12-week
  logbook period is not representative of the use of the car
  throughout the year. A logbook may have to be kept for longer than
  12 weeks if there is no regular pattern of use of the car.

  Claiming car expenses (such as running costs) for a car you access
  under a salary sacrifice arrangement or a novated lease.

For more information on work-related car and transport deductions,
see TR 2021/1 Income tax: when are deductions allowed for
employees' transport expenses?

Work-related travel expenses
This section outlines the documents you need to provide for the
following work-related travel expenses:

  Travel expenses

  Travel expenses using Commissioner’s reasonable amounts

  Claims not more than the Commissioner’s reasonable amounts

  Claims that exceed the Commissioner’s reasonable amounts

  Tolls
   Parking

   Public transport

   Taxis and ride sharing

   Motor vehicle with a carrying capacity greater than one tonne or
   more than 9 passengers

Travel expenses
If you claimed travel expenses, provide the following:

   an employment contract, job description or duty statement showing
   that you needed to travel in the course of performing your work

   details of any travel allowances or reimbursements received,
   including

      the name of the workplace or enterprise bargaining agreement
      the allowance is paid under

      how the allowances or reimbursements were calculated

      details of the expenses they are paid to cover

   a copy of the final payslip for the income year issued by your
   employer

   an explanation of how the travel was work related

   details of any persons that accompanied you and their relationship
   to you, and details of how you worked out the proportion you
   claimed

   a travel diary for each trip that was for 6 nights or more – the diary
   must show what you did each day for work or private purposes
   while travelling

   details of any private travel, for example a holiday after work-related
   travel and an explanation of how you apportioned your claim

   copies of receipts for all meals, accommodation, flights and
   incidentals you are claiming.

You should provide an explanation of how each expense was incurred
in the course of earning your assessable income and cross-reference
your receipts and other evidence with the list of expenses.

If you are a fly in fly out (FIFO) worker, provide the following:
  an employment contract, job description or duty statement showing
  that you needed to travel in the course of performing your work

  details of any allowances or reimbursements received, including

     the name of the workplace/enterprise bargaining agreement the
     allowance is paid under

     how the allowances or reimbursements were calculated

     details of the expenses they are paid to cover

  details of your jump or transit point (for example, location you
  commence to be employed)

  an explanation of how the travel was work-related

  details of how you worked out the proportion you claimed

  copies of all receipts for all meals, accommodation, flights and
  incidentals you are claiming.

You should provide an explanation of how each expense was incurred
in the course of earning your assessable income and cross-reference
your receipts and other evidence with the list of expenses.

Travel expenses using Commissioner’s reasonable
amounts
Unless you incurred the Commissioner’s reasonable amount on
accommodation, meals and incidental expenses you cannot claim
overnight travel expenses based only on the numbers of days you
slept away from home multiplied by the Commissioner's reasonable
amounts.

If the amount you claimed for travel expenses (meals, accommodation
and incidental expenses) was equal to or less than Commissioner’s
reasonable amounts, provide the following:

  an employment contract, job description or duty statement showing
  that you needed to travel in the course of performing your work

  details of any allowances or reimbursements received, including

     the name of the workplace or enterprise bargaining agreement
     the allowance is paid under

     how the allowances or reimbursements were calculated
     details of the expenses they are paid to cover

  a copy of the final payslip for the income year issued by your
  employer

  an explanation of how the overnight travel was work related

  details of any persons that accompanied you and their relationship
  to you, and details of how you worked out the proportion you
  claimed

  information to show you incurred the travel expenses claimed – this
  could include

     hotel booking confirmations

     credit card or bank statements showing accommodation or meal
     expenses

     menus from places you ate at showing the cost of your meals

     a sample of receipts

  the number of nights you slept away from home and the location

  how you calculated the amount claimed, including a list of expenses
  claimed

  if you travelled overseas, receipts for all of your accommodation
  expenses and a travel diary if you travelled overseas for 6 or more
  nights in a row.

You should provide an explanation of how each expense was incurred
in the course of earning your assessable income and cross-reference
your receipts and other evidence with the list of expenses.

Claims not more than the Commissioner’s reasonable
amounts
The following are common issues encountered with travel expense
claims not more than the Commissioner’s reasonable amounts:

  claiming when you did not receive a travel allowance, and you do
  not have written evidence to support your claims

  claiming based on the Commissioner’s reasonable amounts
  multiplied by the number of nights away, when the expenses
  incurred were less than this
  claiming a deduction for travel when you received a travel allowance
  and did not declare the travel allowance as income on your tax
  return.

You can only claim a deduction for the amount you incurred on travel
expenses, and you must be able to show the travel expenses were
actually incurred.

Claims that exceed the Commissioner’s reasonable
amounts
The following are common issues encountered with travel expense
claims that exceed the Commissioner’s reasonable amounts:

  Not keeping a travel diary for domestic or overseas travel of
  6 nights or more

  Claiming when you do not have written evidence to substantiate
  your expenses.

To find out the reasonable travel and overtime meal allowance expense
amounts for the current and previous income years, see:

  TD 2021/6 Income tax: what are the reasonable travel and overtime
  meal allowance expense amounts for the 2021–22 income year?

  TD 2022/10 Income tax: what are the reasonable travel and
  overtime meal allowance expense amounts for the 2022–23 income
  year?

  TD 2023/3 Income tax: what are the reasonable travel and overtime
  meal allowance expense amounts for the 2023–24 income year?

  TD 2024/3 Income tax: what are the reasonable travel and overtime
  meal allowance expense amounts for the 2024–25 income year?

  TD 2025/4 Income tax: reasonable travel and overtime meal
  allowance expense amounts for the 2025–26 income year

Tolls
You need to provide:

  copies of receipts or toll statements which show that you incurred
  the amount being claimed

  evidence or an explanation of how the tolls were related to travel
  undertaken in the course of performing your employment duties
  details of how you worked out the portion of the expense that was
  related to your work, for example, work-related trips highlighted.

Parking
You need to provide these supporting documents for your parking
fees:

  copies of receipts or other documents which show that you incurred
  the amount being claimed

  evidence or an explanation of how the parking was related to travel
  undertaken in the course of performing your employment duties

  details of how you worked out the portion of the expense that was
  related to your work.

Public transport
You need to provide these supporting documents for your public
transport expenses:

  copies of tickets, public transport card statements, receipts or other
  documents which show that you incurred the amount being claimed

  evidence or an explanation of how your travel on public transport
  was undertaken in the course of performing your employment
  duties

  details of how you worked out the portion of the expense that was
  related to your work.

Taxis and ride sharing
You need to provide these supporting documents for your taxi, ride-
share expenses:

  copies of receipts, account statements, or other documents which
  show that you incurred the amount claimed

  evidence or an explanation of how your travel by taxi or ride sharing
  was undertaken in the course of performing your employment
  duties

  details of how you worked out the portion of the expense that was
  related to your work.
Motor vehicle with a carrying capacity of one tonne or
more or 9 passengers
You need to provide these supporting documents for your expenses
for a vehicle that isn't yours or isn't a car:

If your claim relates to the transport of bulky tools and equipment, you
need to provide:

  a list of all work items carried, the weight and size (if work items are
  carried in a bag provide the dimensions and weight of the bag)

  details of the storage available for your tools and equipment at your
  workplace, including details about where it is located, its
  dimensions and whether it can be locked.

For each vehicle you claim provide:

  copies of the purchase, lease, or hire purchase documents,
  including evidence of

     the carrying capacity being one tonne or greater, or

     a carrying capacity of 9 or more passengers (including the driver)

  copies of the vehicle registration certificate or papers

  explanation and supporting documents, such as a diary of how you
  calculated your work use percentage

  a list of each expense and amount claimed

  copies of original receipts for all expenses (including fuel and oil
  costs)

  the decline in value schedule or details of how you calculated your
  claim, including the effective life and the method used (prime cost
  or diminishing value) and an explanation of how you calculated the
  work-related portion of the vehicle.

Ensure copies of original purchase receipts or invoices are provided.

If you borrow a car that is owned or leased by someone else, you may
be able to claim costs incurred if you use the car for your work as an
employee. These expenses include petrol, oil and repair costs directly
related to your use of the car for work purposes.

For more information on the effective life of depreciating assets, see
LI 2025/20 Income tax (Effective Life of Depreciating Assets)
Determination 2025.

Work-related clothing, laundry and dry-cleaning
expenses
This section outlines the supporting documents you need to provide
for expenses claimed for your work-related:

  Uniform

  Laundry

  Dry-cleaning

Uniform
If you claimed the cost of a work uniform that is distinctive (such as
one that has your employer's logo permanently attached to it), it must
be either a:

  non-compulsory uniform that your employer has registered on the
  Register of Approved Occupational Clothing (check with your
  employer if you are not sure)

  compulsory uniform that can be a set of clothing or a single item
  that identifies you as an employee of your employer's organisation –
  there must be a strictly enforced policy making it compulsory to
  wear that clothing at work. Items may include shoes, stockings,
  socks and jumpers where they are an essential part of a distinctive
  compulsory uniform and the colour, style and type are specified in
  your employer's policy.

You need to provide:

  a copy of your employer’s uniform policy

  if your employer doesn’t have a uniform policy, a description of the
  uniform you were required to wear and evidence that it is
  compulsory to wear the clothing at work

  copies of receipts.

You can also claim the cost of:

  occupation-specific clothing which allows people to easily
  recognise that occupation (such as the chequered pants a chef
  wears when working) and which are not for everyday use
  protective clothing and footwear to protect you from the risk of
  illness or injury, or to prevent damage to your ordinary clothes,
  caused by your work or work environment. Items may include fire-
  resistant clothing, sun protection clothing, safety-coloured vests,
  non-slip nurse's shoes, steel-capped boots, gloves, overalls,
  aprons, and heavy duty shirts and trousers (but not jeans). You
  need to provide a description of the protective clothing and
  equipment you were required to wear and copies of receipts.

You can claim the cost of protective equipment, such as hard hats and
safety glasses at Other work-related expenses.

You can claim the cost of renting, repairing and cleaning any of the
above work-related clothing.

Laundry
You need to provide these supporting documents for your laundry:

  a description of the work-related clothing worn

  details of how you calculated your claim

  if the laundry claim exceeds $150, provide receipts for all expenses.

Claims for laundry expenses that don't exceed $150 can be based on a
cost of:

  $1 per load if you wash only your work clothes

  50 cents per load if you wash other clothes together with your work
  clothes.

To make a claim for laundry in this manner, the clothing being
laundered must be a uniform, occupation specific clothing or
protective clothing.

You can't claim the cost of purchasing or cleaning plain clothes, such
as black trousers, white shirts, suits and stockings, even if your
employer requires you to wear them.

Dry-cleaning
You need to provide these supporting documents for your dry-
cleaning:

  a description of the work-related clothing worn
  copies of receipts.

Work-related self-education expenses
A claim for self-education expenses related to your work as an
employee can be claimed if you work and study at the same time and
can satisfy any of these conditions:

  the study maintains or improves the specific skills or knowledge you
  require for your current employment

  you can show that at the time you were working and studying, your
  course led, or was likely to lead, to an increase in income from your
  current employment.

You can't claim a deduction for self-education expenses if:

  at the time you incurred them you were not employed

  the study relates only in a general way to your current employment
  or profession, or

  the study will enable you to get new employment or change
  employment.

Provide the following:

  a list of the expenses and the amount of each expense claimed
  along with

     full details of the course you undertook

     the name of the institution where it was undertaken

     the date you began your course

     whether you were a full-time or part-time student

     a copy of the course outline

     the nature of each expense and the amount claimed

  an explanation as to how the course directly relates to your
  employment at the time you were undertaking the course

  your employment contract including a job description or a duty
  statement

  copies of original receipts or other documents, for example a
  Commonwealth Assistance Notice (CAN) to support each expense
  included in your claim.

You can't claim a tax deduction for the following expenses:

  self-education expenses such as tuition fees paid to an education
  provider by you or the Australian Government under Higher
  Education Contribution Scheme-Higher Education Loan Programs
  (HECS-HELP)

  the cost of accommodation and meals associated with day-to-day
  living expenses

  repayments you make (whether compulsory or voluntary) on debts
  you may have under the following loan schemes

     HECS-HELP

     FEE-HELP

     SSL (Student Start-up Loans)

     SFSS (Student Financial Supplement Scheme)

     AASL (Australian Apprenticeship Support Loans)

     VSL (VET Student Loans).

Short course training and on the job training
You need to provide a list of the expenses and the amount of each
expense claimed along with:

  full details of the course or training you undertook

  a copy of your course or training outline

  the name of the institution or facility where it was undertaken

  the date(s) you began and completed your course or training

  the nature of each expense and the amount claimed

  an explanation as to how the course or training directly relates to
  your employment

  your employment contract including a job description or a duty
  statement

  copies of original receipts or other documents to support each
  expense included in your claim.
TR 2024/3 Income tax: deductibility of self-education expenses
incurred by an individual sets out the circumstances when self-
education expenses can be allowable as a tax deduction.

Work from home expenses – home office expenses
Home office expenses are broken down into 2 categories: running
expenses and occupancy expenses.

This section outlines the supporting documents to provide for work
from home for:

  Running costs

  Occupancy costs

Running costs
Running expenses are costs associated with using the home. These
costs will increase due to an employee working from home.

There are 2 methods available to calculate your claim for running
expenses. You can claim a fixed rate per hour using the fixed rate
method or you can calculate your actual expenses using the actual
cost method.

If you are using the fixed rate method, you need to provide:

  an explanation of the work performed from home

  a record of the number of actual hours you work from home during
  the entire income year – for example, a timesheet, roster, diary or
  other similar document as long as it was kept contemporaneously
  (see below if your claim relates to the 2022–23 income year)

  a bill for each of the expenses covered by the fixed rate that you
  incurred, for example, if you incurred electricity and internet
  expenses you will need to keep one electricity bill and one internet
  bill for the income year you are claiming a deduction for

  details of how you calculated your claim

  a copy of the purchase receipts for any depreciating assets you
  used while working from home

  a depreciation schedule for those assets or details of how you
  calculated your claim, including the effective life and the method
  used (prime cost or diminishing value) for each asset and a copy of
  your diary, over a representative 4-week period, or other evidence
  that shows how you worked out your work-related use of the items

  receipts for any other expenses being claimed that are not covered
  by the fixed rate.

For the 2022–23 income year only, if you did not keep a record of the
actual hours you worked from home you must be able to provide both:

  a representative record of the total number of hours worked from
  home during the period from 1 July 2022 to 28 February 2023 – for
  example, any kind of record of the hours you worked from home for
  a particular period that you can apply to the whole 8-month period

  a record of the total number of actual hours worked from home for
  the period 1 March 2023 to 30 June 2023.

For more information, please see: Practical Compliance Guideline
PCG 2023/1.

If you are using the actual cost method, you need to provide:

  an explanation of the work performed from home

  receipts for the purchase of each depreciating asset

  the depreciation schedule or details of how you calculated your
  claim, including the effective life and the method used (prime cost
  or diminishing value) for each item

  copy of your diary, over a representative 4-week period, or other
  evidence that shows how often and for how long you worked from
  home

  if you claimed electricity, heating, cooling, and lighting

     evidence of the total cost of the utility service for the year of
     income such as a copy of your utility bills

     the cost per unit of power used – refer to your utility bill for this
     information

     the average units used per hour – this is the power consumption
     per kilowatt hour for each appliance, equipment or light used

     the total annual hours used for work-related purposes based on
     your diary
  receipts for any other expenses you claimed and how you
  calculated your work-related use.

If you had a dedicated home office and claimed cleaning expenses:

  a floor plan of your home, with the home office space identified.
  This must show the total floor area of the house and the area of the
  home office

  copies of receipts.

Occupancy costs
Employees are generally not able to claim occupancy expenses.

Occupancy expenses relate to costs of owning or renting a home.
These costs generally won’t change from an employee working from
home.

You can only claim the work-related proportion of your occupancy
expenses if your home office (or other dedicated area of your home) is
a place of business. You need to provide the following information and
evidence:

  an explanation of the work performed from your home office

  if your employer provides you with an office or work location

  if your employer does provide you with an office or work location,
  the reasons it was necessary for you to work from home

  your working from home agreement with your employer

  if your employment duties require you to have a place of business

  if your home office (or dedicated area) is clearly identifiable as a
  place of business

  photos of your home office (or dedicated area)

  if your home office (or dedicated area) is used exclusively or almost
  exclusively for carrying on a business

  if your home office (or dedicated area) is used regularly for visits of
  clients or customers

  a floor plan of your home, with the home office space identified
  (this must show the total floor area of the house and the area of the
  home office)
  evidence of the amount of rent, mortgage interest, property
  insurance, land taxes or rates incurred.

If you are entitled to claim occupancy expenses, (even if you don’t
claim them) you don't qualify for the capital gains tax (CGT) main
residence exemption for the part of your home that you use for work. If
you use your home as a place of business, there may be CGT
implications when you sell it.

For more information, see TR 93/30 Income tax: deductions for home
office expenses.

Other work-related expenses
Find out what supporting documents you need to verify your claim for:

  Mobile and home telephone use

  Internet and data expenses

  Union dues

  Memberships and professional registrations

  Overtime meal expenses

  Books and magazines for professional library

  Computer parts, consumables and stationery

  Purchase of equipment or decline in value

  Sun protection

  COVID-19 personal protective items

  All other expenses

Mobile and home telephone use
You need to provide these supporting documents for your mobile and
home telephone use:

  an explanation of how the phone was used for work and how you
  calculated your claim

  evidence of the total cost of the service for the year of income

  itemised bill with the outgoing private and outgoing work-related
  calls clearly and distinctly marked and tallied
  if no itemised bill is available – a representative 4-week diary
  showing your work-related and private use of the service.

Internet and data expenses
You need to provide these supporting documents for your internet and
data expenses:

  an explanation of how the internet was used for work and how you
  calculated your claim, including allowing for usage of other
  members of your household

  evidence of the total cost of the service for the year of income

  evidence of how you established the work-related portion – this
  could be

     a diary covering a representative 4-week period showing your
     work-related use, private use and use by other members of your
     household of the service

     a record of the amount of data downloaded for work as a
     percentage of the total data downloaded by all members of your
     household

     any additional costs incurred as a result of your work-related use,
     for example, if your work-related use resulted in you exceeding
     your monthly cap.

Guidance – mobile and home phone, and internet

If you are using the fixed rate method to claim working from home
expenses, all expenses related to working from home are included in
this rate. This includes mobile and home phone and internet that you
use while you are working from home and when you are not working
from home. That is, even if you use your mobile phone and internet
when you are not working from home, you can’t claim a separate
deduction for these expenses.

Union dues
You need to provide evidence to show you paid the amount of union
fees that you are claiming in the income year. You can use your income
statement or payment summary as evidence if your union dues are
shown on it.

Memberships and professional registrations
You need to provide these supporting documents for your professional
memberships and accreditations:

  copies of invoices, payslips or bank statements showing the total
  amount paid in membership fees for the income year

  details of how the expense was connected to your work.

Overtime meal expenses
If you claim less than the reasonable amount for overtime meal
expenses, you need to provide supporting documents for your
overtime meal expenses:

  evidence (such as an employment contract or payslips) confirming

     you were paid an overtime meal allowance

     the amount paid per occasion and the name of the industrial law,
     award or agreement under which the allowance was paid

  information to show you incurred the overtime meal expenses
  claimed – this could include credit card or bank statements showing
  meal expenses, menus from places you ate at and the cost of those
  meals, or a sample of receipts

  the number of instances you worked overtime and were paid an
  overtime meal allowance

  a copy of your final payslip for the income year issued by your
  employer

  an explanation of how you calculated the amount claimed.

If you claim more than the reasonable amount for overtime meal
expenses, you need to have a receipt for each overtime meal.

To find out the reasonable travel and overtime meal allowance expense
amounts for the current and previous income years, see:

  TD 2021/6 Income tax: what are the reasonable travel and overtime
  meal allowance expense amounts for the 2021–22 income year?

  TD 2022/10 Income tax: what are the reasonable travel and
  overtime meal allowance expense amounts for the 2022–23 income
  year?

  TD 2023/3 Income tax: what are the reasonable travel and overtime
  meal allowance expense amounts for the 2023–24 income year?
  TD 2024/3 Income tax: what are the reasonable travel and overtime
  meal allowance expense amounts for the 2024–25 income year?

  TD 2025/4 Income tax: reasonable travel and overtime meal
  allowance expense amounts for the 2025–26 income year

Books and magazines for professional library
You need to provide these supporting documents for your books,
periodicals and digital information:

  an explanation of how each item relates to your employment duties

  copies of receipts, invoices or other documents which show you
  incurred the amount claimed

  where the expenses are partially private in nature, details of how
  you worked out the work-related portion of the claim

  copy of a decline in value schedule for a professional library.

Computer consumables and stationery
You need to provide these supporting documents for your stationery
and office supplies:

  copies of purchase invoices or receipts for all items

  an explanation for how the expenses were connected with your
  employment duties

  details of how the work-related portion of your expenses were
  worked out.

If you claim your working from home expenses using the fixed rate
method, you can’t claim a separate deduction for computer
consumables, for example printer ink, or stationery. The rate per hour
includes these expenses.

Purchase of equipment or decline in value
You need to provide these supporting documents for your tools,
computers and items you use for work:

  an explanation for how each item relates to your employment duties

  copies of purchase invoices or receipts for all items
  an explanation of how you calculated the work-related portion for
  each item

  the decline in value schedule or details of how you calculated your
  claim, including the effective life and the method used (prime cost
  or diminishing value) for each item.

Tools and equipment are generally depreciating assets that decline in
value over time. How you work out your deduction will depend on if the
item's cost.

You can claim an immediate deduction for the depreciating asset if it
cost $300 or less and it is:

  used by you more than 50% of the time to earn non-business
  assessable income

  not part of a set that together cost more than $300

  not one of a number of identical, or substantially identical, items
  that together cost more than $300.

You can claim a deduction for the decline in value over the effective
life of the item, if the item:

  cost more than $300

  forms part of a set that together cost more than $300

  is identical, or substantially identical to, other items that together
  cost more than $300.

You need to apportion your deduction if you use the item for both work
and private purposes.

Sun protection
You need to provide supporting documents for your sunscreen and
sunhats:

  copies of invoices or receipts for the expenses

  an explanation of how your employment duties expose you to the
  sun for prolonged periods

  details of how you worked out the work-related portion of the
  expenses.

Legal expenses
If you are claiming legal expenses related to you earning assessable
income provide the following:

  itemised tax invoices from lawyers that detail what actions were
  taken for you and amounts that were charged

  statement of claims that were submitted to the court or tribunal or
  any legal document from legal representatives that will specify what
  you are seeking from taking the action (for example, unpaid salary
  and wages or other weekly payments, damages for dismissal,
  injuries, medical and like expenses)

  court orders, court decisions or any other legal documents that
  show what was awarded (or not) to you and any other legal
  documents that show dollar amounts and what was awarded under
  each claim (for example, compensation, medical expenses, interest,
  legal costs) and details of the case

  copies of signed and executed settlement deeds if the matter was
  settled out of court

  if you were suspended or terminated or demoted from your job, a
  notice of termination and/or notice of suspension/demotion from
  the employer that will identify reasons for suspension or termination
  or demotion and/or allegations

  if you were not given notices of termination or suspension or
  demotion, we need evidence of exact dates you were suspended or
  terminated or demoted, the date you were advised of an
  investigation (if relevant) and any other relevant dates

  if applicable, a copy of correspondence between the interested
  parties, for example between you, your tax agent and legal
  representatives, between legal representatives and employers or
  other parties

  bank statements to show when the legal expenses were paid.

All other expenses
You need to provide these supporting documents for other deductions
you can claim:

  copies of invoices or receipts for the expenses

  an explanation for how the expenses were connected to your
  employment duties
  details of how you worked out the work-related portion of the
  expenses.

Low-value pool deduction
The following can't be included in a low-value pool:

  assets you have previously claimed deductions for using the prime
  cost method

  assets that cost $300 or less for which you can claim an immediate
  deduction

  assets for which you deduct amounts under the simplified
  depreciation rules for small business entities

  horticultural plants

  a portable electronic device (such as a mobile phone, personal
  digital assistant or laptop computer), computer software, protective
  clothing, a briefcase or a tool of trade, which is primarily for use in
  your employment, if your employer provided it, paid for it or
  reimbursed you for any of its cost, and the benefit was exempt from
  fringe benefits tax.

For your low-value pool provide the following:

  an explanation of how the assets in your pool are used to earn your
  income

  evidence to show that you used the assets in your pool to carry out
  your employment duties (such as a job description, employment
  contract).

For each year being audited, provide the following information:

  a list of the low-cost or low-value assets included in your claim for
  low-value pool deduction

  your reasonable estimate of the work-related use of each asset at
  the time it was allocated to the pool

  details of how your claim was calculated, including your worksheet
  used to calculate your claim

  documents showing the purchase price of the assets.

Interest income deductions
Provide the following supporting documents for your interest
deductions:

  a list of all expenses incurred to earn your interest income that you
  have claimed, showing

     the amount of the expense

     date of the expense

     who it was paid to

  if you borrowed funds to purchase investments which generate
  interest income

     copies of loan documents which show the date the loans were
     obtained and the amount borrowed

     what the investments you purchased with the borrowed funds

  documents to support the expenses you have claimed – for
  example, copies of bank statements, loan agreements

  calculations regarding how you determined the amount claimed if
  the loan funds were used to purchase more than one asset, for
  example, your family home and an interest earning investment

  if you were able to drawdown funds (withdraw cash back) from your
  loan or line of credit, provide information about what each of those
  drawdowns was for.

If no interest income has been received during the income year or is
less than the expense claimed, also provide:

  the reason no interest income or a smaller amount of income was
  received

  whether you expect to receive a return on the investment and, if so,
  when and the amounts you expect to receive

  whether income has been received in a previous year and, if so,
  when the amounts were received.

Dividend deductions
You need to provide these supporting documents for your dividend
and share deductions:

  a list of all dividend expenses you have claimed, showing
     the amount of the expense

     date of the expense

     who it was paid to

     the date any loans were obtained to purchase shares

     the amount of funds borrowed

     the nature of the investments, including whether they are in
     public or private companies, for example shares in XY Pty Ltd
     (private company)

     the income you received from these investments during the
     income year

  documents to support the expenses you have claimed – for
  example, copies of bank statements, management fee and
  investment advice invoices.

If no dividend income has been received during the income year, also
provide:

  the reason no income was received

  whether you expect to receive a return on the investment and, if so,
  when and what amounts you expect to receive

  whether income has been received in a previous year and, if so,
  when and what amounts were received.

Gifts or donations
Provide a copy of receipts or any other documents you have to
support you gifts and donations claim showing the:

  names of the recipients of each gift or donation – including the
  recipient’s Australian business number (ABN)

  date that each gift or donation was made

  nature and amount of each gift or donation.

Cost of managing tax affairs
Provide copies of invoices, receipts or statements showing the
expenses incurred to manage your tax affairs. This information should
show:
  the amount of the expense

  the date of the expense

  who it was paid to

  the nature of the services provided and who the services were
  provided to.


Medicare levy exemption
Provide the following:

  details of why you believe you are exempt from the Medicare levy

  if you are exempt from the Medicare levy because you are not
  entitled to Medicare benefits, a copy of a Medicare entitlement
  statement from Services Australia.


Private Health Insurance
Provide a copy of your private health insurance fund statement.


Tax offsets
Seniors and pensioners
For the Seniors and pensioners tax offset (including if you are a self-
funded retirees) provide documents to show all of the taxable
Australian Government allowances and payments you received and
any overpayments you have repaid for the income year. If you had a
spouse, documents showing they were eligible for the offset.


Australian superannuation income stream
For the Superannuation income stream tax offset provide documents
to show all of the taxable Australian superannuation pensions and
annuities (income streams) you received and any overpayments you
have repaid for the income year.


Supplementary income
This section outlines the supporting documents you need to provide
for the following types of supplementary income:

  Partnerships and trusts

  Personal services income (PSI)

  Net income or loss from business

  Rent income and expenses


Partnerships and trusts
Provide a statement or advice from the partnership or trustee showing
the following details about your share of any distribution including:

  the amount of any primary production income or loss and the
  amount of any non-primary production income or loss

  the amount of any gross and net capital gains

  the amount of attributed foreign income and other foreign source
  income

  the amount of any income where family trust distribution tax has not
  been paid

  your entitlement to any tax offsets or credits

  details of any deductions you can claim against your partnership or
  trust distribution that has not already been claimed by the
  partnership or trust.

If no income has been received during the income year, or is less than
the expense claimed, also provide:

  the reason no income or a smaller amount of income was received

  whether you expect to receive a return on the investment and, if so,
  when the amounts are expected to be received

  whether income has been received in a previous year and, if so,
  when the amounts were received.


Personal services income (PSI)
Provide the following supporting documents for your PSI:

  details of the nature of the activities being conducted that
  generated the income
  copies of the original contract or agreement that show the terms
  and conditions of each contract or agreement with the payer

  copies of your original payment summary or summaries.


Net income or loss from business
Provide the following supporting documents for your income and
deductions for business:

  a breakdown and an explanation of the expenses you are claiming,
  including the amount of each expense and the nature of the
  expense

  documentary evidence to support the amount of your income and
  deductions.


Rental income and expenses
For each rental property, provide the following supporting documents:

  evidence of your share of ownership, such as the title deed

  copies of rental agreements between you and your tenants

  copies of records showing the rent received for the property

  evidence to show how you determined how much rent to charge,
  such as a letter or emails from your real estate agent or property
  manager

  copies of documents advertising or showing the availability of the
  property for rent and evidence of all other action taken to rent the
  property

  loan documents – for example, loan approval letter, loan
  applications, mortgage documents, letter from a bank advising of
  prepayment or solicitor's settlement statement

  bank statements for the loan account

  any worksheets or other documents showing how the interest
  claimed was calculated

  details of the work your capital works deduction is based on,
  including the costs and nature of the work undertaken
   a list of all other expenses claimed, including the nature of the
   expense and who the expense was paid to

   copies of receipts or documents for each expense

   a copy of the quantity surveyor report or tax depreciation report, if
   you are claiming decline in value of depreciating assets.

For more information, see Record keeping for rental properties


Supplementary deductions
This section outlines the supporting documents you need to provide
for:

   Personal superannuation contributions

   Deductions for project pool

   Forestry managed investment scheme deduction

   Other deductions

Personal superannuation contributions
Provide a copy of the letter from your super fund acknowledging
receipt of your notice of intent to claim a deduction for personal super
contributions.


Deductions for project pool
Provide the following:

   information on the project, expected life and completion date

   copies of invoices to support the capital expenditure connected to
   the project

   depreciation schedule showing how the amounts are calculated in
   the project pool.


Forestry managed investment scheme deduction
If you are an initial participant, provide the following:

   the name of the forestry managed investment scheme (FIMS)
  copies of your initial contributions notice from the forestry manager
  and evidence of any ongoing payments you have made

  evidence that the scheme is a qualifying scheme

  evidence that your interest results in the establishment of trees.

If you are a subsequent participant, provide the following:

  the name of the forestry managed investment scheme (FIMS)

  evidence of your ongoing payments to the scheme.

For more information, see PS LA 2008/2 Forestry managed investment
schemes


Other deductions
Provide copies of receipts or any other documents you have to support
this claim including a description of the expense, the amount claimed
and how the expense was incurred in the course of earning your
assessable income.

For more information:

  see Deductions you can claim

  watch our video Get your deductions right      .


Supplementary offsets
This section outlines the supporting documents required for the
following offsets:

  Superannuation contributions on behalf of your spouse

  Zone or overseas forces

  Invalid and invalid carer

  Landcare and water facility

  ESVCLP tax incentives and concessions

  Early stage investor tax offset

  Other refundable tax offset
If you are unable to provide all of the documents, we may need to seek
further information from you.

Superannuation contributions on behalf of your
spouse
Provide the following:

  full name of your spouse for whom you made contributions during
  the income year

  residential address of your spouse

  date of birth of your spouse

  proof of identity of your spouse – for example, a copy of their
  passport, birth certificate or marriage certificate

  evidence of residence of your spouse – for example, a copy of a
  bank statement, a driver licence or rates notice that shows their
  name and address

  details of your spouse's assessable income, total reportable fringe
  benefits amounts and reportable employer super contributions

  bank statements, cheque butts and other documents that show you
  paid the contributions to your spouse's super fund or retirement
  savings account (RSA)

  the contribution statement from the complying super fund or RSA
  showing the total amount of contributions in the income year

  your calculation of the tax offset.

Zone or overseas forces
Eligibility for the zone offset is based on where your usual place of
residence is. If your usual place of residence was not in a qualifying
remote zone, you are not eligible for the zone tax offset. You won’t be
eligible if you work in a qualifying remote zone but you don’t live there,
for example, fly-in-fly-out workers.

Your usual place of residence must be within a prescribed 'zone' to
claim the Zone Tax Offset for more than 183 days during the income
year. To check if your usual place of residence is within a prescribed
'zone' refer to the Australian zone list.

Provide the following:
  details of the remote area your usual place of residence was
  located, evidence that it was usual place of residence and the
  number of days it was your usual place of residence for the income
  year

  if your usual place of residence was located in the qualifying remote
  zone for less than 183 days and you are relying on earlier income
  years to claim, evidence of the number of days your usual place of
  residence was in that area in those earlier income years

  documents to support your claim – evidence may include copies of
  accounts addressed to you at the remote location

  details and adjusted taxable income of any dependants included in
  your calculation of the zone offset

  a copy of your worksheets showing how you calculated the amount
  of zone offset claimed

  evidence of any remote area allowance received.

If you are claiming the Overseas forces tax offset, provide:

  the address details of the specified overseas locality in which you
  served as a member of the Australian Defence Force or a United
  Nations armed force

  details of the specified overseas locality in which you served as a
  member of the Australian Defence Force or a United Nations armed
  force

  the number of days you served in the overseas locality.

Invalid and invalid carer
If your dependant is unable to work due to invalidity, provide the
following:

  evidence your dependant is receiving one of the following payments

     disability support pension

     special needs disability support pension under the Social
     Security Act 1991(SSA)

     an invalidity support pension under the Veterans’ Entitlements
     Act 1986 (VEA).
If your dependant is unable to work due to carer obligations, provide
the following:

  evidence your dependant is either

     receiving a carer payment or carer allowance under the SSA

     wholly engaged in providing care to a relative who receives one
     of the following

        a disability support pension

        a special needs disability support pension under the SSA

        an invalidity support pension under the VEA.

Also provide:

  the residential address of your dependant

  their relationship to you

  the period of their dependency

  your dependant’s adjusted taxable income (ATI), including periodical
  payments by way of gifts or allowances from sources outside
  Australia

  if more than one person contributes to the care of the dependant,
  details of your proportion of care

  proof of identity of your dependent relative – for example, copy of
  their passport with current visa, birth certificate or marriage
  certificate.

Early stage venture capital limited partnership
(ESVCLP) tax offset
If you are claiming the ESVCLP tax offset, the fund will have provided
each Limited Partner with written notification of investor contributions.
In verifying your ESVCLP Offset claim, you may provide the following:

  ESVCLP Distributions from Partnerships statements (provided by
  the Fund)

  share certificates issued by ESVCLP detailing your ownership of the
  shares

  receipts or confirmations from the ESVCLP
  bank statements showing transfers to the ESVCLP

  trust distribution statements – if offset eligibility is streamed to you
  via a trust

  letters from partnerships and trusts explaining your entitlement to
  the ESVCLP offset

  capital call notices from the Fund (if required)

  letters from the ESVCLP confirming your investment.


Early stage investor tax offset
An early stage innovation company (ESIC) will provide an Annual
Information Report by 31 July following the end of the financial year.
This will contain information about your investment. In verifying your
Early stage investor tax offset, you may provide the following:

  share certificates, containing the investor name, number of shares
  issued, class of shares (must be ordinary shares), issue date, issue
  price and company details (ACN)

  receipts for payments for shares

  bank statements showing transfers to the ESIC

  trust distribution statements – if offset eligibility is streamed to you
  via a trust

  partnership distribution statements – showing your ESIC offset
  entitlement

  letters from partnerships and trusts

  letters from the ESIC confirming your investment.


Other refundable tax offset
If you are claiming the tax offset for tax paid by the trustee on the net
income of a special disability trust, provide the following:

  trust distribution statement issued by the trustee of the special
  disability trust to you who is the sole principal beneficiary

  a copy of the special disability trust tax return showing it paid tax
  which should reflect your T9 amount.
If you are claiming the tax offset for exploration credits, provide the
following:

   Exploration Development Incentive (EDI) Certificate of Entitlement

   Junior Minerals Exploration Incentive (JMEI) Certification of
   Entitlement.

If the EDI/JMEI is in the name of a related entity (trust or partnership)

   trust distribution statement for the relevant year and the amount of
   'Exploration credits distributed' to you from the trust

   a copy of the partnership tax return for the relevant year and the
   amount of 'Exploration credits distributed' to you as partner.




QC 24929



Income tests
What income is used to work out your eligibility for some
tax offsets and benefits.

Last updated 8 June 2026




Income tests and your tax return
We use items from your tax return when applying income tests.

Ensure that you complete all items that apply to you in the income
tests section of your tax return.

If you have a spouse, you should also include your spouse's income in
the Spouse details section of your tax return.


When income tests apply
We use income tests to work out whether tax offsets and other items
apply to you.

Tax offsets include:

   invalid and invalid carer tax offset
  seniors and pensioners tax offset

  Medicare levy surcharge (lump sum payment in arrears) tax offset

  spouse super contributions tax offset

  private health insurance tax offset.

Other items include:

  private health insurance liability

  Medicare levy surcharge threshold calculation

  government super co-contribution

  a deduction for your personal super contributions

  a deduction for your business losses (non-commercial losses)

  income tax concessions available to participants in certain
  employee share schemes

  study and training support loan repayments.

We use the family income threshold to assess most offsets, benefits
and obligations.


Adjusted taxable income
Your adjusted taxable income (ATI) affects your entitlement to any
dependant tax offset.

Use the calculator to work out your ATI.


  Income tests calculator


To manually work out your ATI, add the following amounts together
and subtract any child support you pay:

  taxable income (your assessable income minus deductions),
  disregarding any assessable first home super saver (FHSS)
  released amount

  adjusted fringe benefits total, which is the sum of

     reportable fringe benefits amounts received from employers
     exempt from fringe benefits tax under section 57A of the Fringe
     Benefits Tax Assessment Act 1986, multiplied by 0.53

     reportable fringe benefits amounts from employers not exempt
     from fringe benefits tax under section 57A of the Fringe Benefits
     Tax Assessment Act 1986

  target foreign income (includes any income earned from overseas
  that is not already included in your taxable income or received in
  the form of a fringe benefit)

  total net investment loss (includes both net financial investment
  loss and net rental property loss)

  tax-free government pensions or benefits (includes certain
  disability pensions, carer payments and defence pensions)

  reportable super contributions (includes both reportable employer
  super contributions and deductible personal super contributions).


Rebate income
We work out what we call 'rebate income' to determine whether you
are entitled to the seniors and pensioners tax offset (SAPTO).

If you want to work it out yourself, use the calculator.


  Income tests calculator


Your rebate income is the total of your taxable income (disregarding
your assessable First home super saver released amount), plus the
following amounts if they apply to you:

  reportable super contributions (includes both reportable employer
  super contributions and deductible personal super contributions)

  total net investment loss (includes both net financial investment
  loss and net rental property loss)

  adjusted fringe benefits total, which is the sum of

     reportable fringe benefits amounts received from employers
     exempt from fringe benefits tax under section 57A of the Fringe
     Benefits Tax Assessment Act 1986, multiplied by 0.53

     reportable fringe benefits amounts from employers not exempt
     from fringe benefits tax under section 57A of the Fringe Benefits
     Tax Assessment Act 1986.


Income for Medicare levy surcharge
purposes
We use your income for Medicare levy surcharge (MLS) purposes to
work out if you have to pay the MLS and the rate you will pay.

Use the calculator to work out your income for MLS purposes.


  Income tests calculator


Alternatively, you can manually calculate your income for MLS
purposes.


Study and training support loan repayment
income
Study and training support loan repayment income includes your:

  taxable income (your assessable income minus deductions),
  disregarding any assessable First home super saver released
  amount

  total net investment loss (includes both net financial investment
  loss and net rental property loss)

  reportable fringe benefits amount, as reported on your income
  statement or payment summary

  exempt foreign employment income which is the income exempt
  under sections 23AF or 23AG less expenses incurred in deriving
  that income.

  reportable super contributions (includes both reportable employer
  super contributions and deductible personal super contributions).

This applies to the:

  Higher Education Loan Program (HELP)

  Student Start-up Loan (SSL)

  ABSTUDY Student Start-up Loan (ABSTUDY SSL)
   VET Student Loan (VSL)

   Australian Apprenticeship Support Loan (AASL)

   Student Financial Supplement Scheme (SFSS).


Super income tests
Reportable employer super contributions are included in the income
tests for the following:

   spouse super contributions tax offset

   government super co-contribution

   deduction for personal super contributions.




QC 72207



Tradies – be certain about what
you can claim
If you're a tradie, find out what you can claim on your tax
return, whether you're an employee or run a small
business.

Last updated 27 May 2026



What can you claim
If you're a tradie, what you can claim in your tax return depends on
whether:

   you're an employee tradie, or

   you run a small business (sole trader, partnership, company or
   trust).


Employee tradies
You can claim a deduction for expenses incurred as an employee
tradie if:

  you spent the money yourself and were not reimbursed

  it was directly related to earning your income

  you have a record to prove it (usually a receipt).

If your expense was for both work and private purposes, you can only
claim a deduction for the work-related portion.

For more information about what you can claim, see our occupation
guides for:

  Tradies (PDF, 343KB)

  Apprentices (PDF, 443KB)

  Construction workers (PDF, 311KB)       .


Protective clothing or items
You can claim a deduction for protective clothing or items that have
features or functions to protect you from specific risks of injury or
illness at work.

These may include:

  protective clothing and footwear (for example, hi-vis vests and
  steel-capped boots)

  protective and safety equipment as well as occupation health and
  safety equipment (for example, safety glasses, safety helmets and
  earmuffs, or sunscreen, sunhats and sunglasses where you are
  required to work outdoors).


Buying tools for work
You can claim a deduction for tools or equipment if you use them for
work purposes.

  If you also use the tools or equipment for private purposes, you can
  only claim the work-related portion.

  If you bought the tool or item of equipment part way through the
  financial year, you can only claim a deduction for the portion of the
  year that you owned it.
  If the tools or equipment are supplied by your employer, another
  person, or you are reimbursed for the cost, you can’t claim a
  deduction.

If a tool or item of equipment is only used for work and:

  cost more than $300 – you can claim a deduction for the cost over a
  number of years (that is, depreciation or the decline in value)

  cost $300 or less – you can claim an immediate deduction for the
  whole cost.

If you buy an item for work that forms part of a set and the whole set
costs more than $300 but the individual item costs less than $300,
you can claim a deduction for the decline in value (depreciation) of the
whole set. You can't claim an immediate deduction for each individual
item. This is because the combined cost of the set is more than $300.

For example, if you buy a ratchet set for $350 you can only claim the
decline in value of the set, even if you could buy each of the individual
ratchets for less than $300 each. However, if in a later income year,
you buy an additional socket to replace part of the set you have lost,
you can claim the full cost of the socket if it costs less than $300.

Work out your claim for the decline in value for a depreciating asset
using our Depreciation and capital allowances tool.


Car expenses
You may be able to claim the cost of trips between home and work
when you transport bulky tools or equipment for work purposes. You
can only claim a deduction for the cost of these trips if you meet all of
the following conditions:

  The tools or equipment are essential for your employment duties.

  The tools or equipment are bulky (this means that because of the
  size and weight, they are awkward to transport and can only be
  transported conveniently by the use of a motor vehicle).

  There is no secure storage area for such items at the workplace
  location.

If you claim car expenses, you must either:

  keep a valid logbook to determine the percentage of work-related
  use of your car along with evidence of your car expenses (logbook
   method)

   calculate your work-related kilometres and be able to show that
   those kilometres were work related (cents per kilometre method –
   this is only available for claims up to 5,000 km).

Your vehicle is not considered to be a car if it is a vehicle that:

   has a carrying capacity of one tonne or more, such as a ute or panel
   van

   can transport 9 passengers or more, such as a minivan.

Claiming actual expenses
For vehicles that are not considered a car, you can claim the actual
expenses that relate to your work travel. For example, if you use a
vehicle with a carrying capacity of one tonne or more.

Examples of actual expenses include:

   car loan interest

   depreciation

   fuel

   insurance

   oil

   registration

   repairs and servicing

You must keep records of all your actual expenses to prove your
expense claims, as well as records that show how you have calculated
your work travel as a percentage of your overall travel. While it is not a
requirement to keep a logbook, it is the easiest way to show how you
have calculated your work-related use of the vehicle.

You can't use the cents per kilometre method for vehicles that are not
a car.


Other things you can claim
You may also be able to claim the cost of:

   licences, permits and cards, such as a forklift or heavy vehicle
   permit (but you can’t claim the cost of getting and maintaining a
  private drivers licence)

  self-education expenses, such as upskilling that's directly related to
  your existing business

  your phone and internet.

Remember you can’t claim a deduction for the same expenses twice.
For example, if you’re using the cents per kilometre method, you can’t
claim car expenses such as rego, insurance, fuel, servicing, and
depreciation separately as these expenses are included in this rate.


Record keeping
If you claim a tax deduction, you must have a receipt or invoice or
other form of written evidence from the supplier and be able to show
how you calculated your claims. Records can be electronic (for
example, you can take a photo of your receipt, or use the
myDeductions tool in the ATO app).

The receipt or other form of written evidence must show the:

  amount of the expense

  date of the document

  date the expense was paid

  name of the supplier

  nature of the goods or services.

Bank or credit card statements usually won’t contain this information.

After you've lodged your tax return for the year, you must keep your
records for a minimum of 5 years.

If you're claiming a deduction for the cost of a depreciating asset used
for work, such as a laptop, you must keep both:

  purchase receipts

  a depreciation schedule or details of how you calculated your claim
  for decline in value, for 5 years following your final claim.


The best time to lodge
Generally, the best time to lodge your tax return is from late July for
employees or after 28 August for sole traders. By then, your income
statement will be marked as 'tax ready' and you can take advantage of
the pre-fill information available in myTax (or with your tax agent).

Pre-fill information is the data we already have on our systems plus the
information provided to us by third parties, including your employer,
banks, government agencies and private health insurance providers.

Pre-fill for sole traders includes:

   assessable payments received by you, including government grants
   and payments, that were reported on the Taxable payments annual
   report (TPAR)

   your Australian business number (ABN)

   the value of your opening stock (if any).

If you wait for pre-filled information to be available before completing
your tax return, you still need to review the information and add any
missing details or update incorrect details. This way you're less likely
to miss any income that you must include.

If you prefer to lodge before your information has been pre-filled, you’ll
need to keep good records so you can substantiate all reported
income and associated credits. Remember to include all of your
income such as cash jobs, the sharing economy, your second job,
foreign sources and capital gains.

Tax time information
For more information on tax and superannuation changes that may
impact you as an employee, see What's new for individuals.


Small businesses (sole trader, partnership,
company or trust)
You can claim a business tax deduction for most expenses from
carrying on your business, as long as they are directly related to
earning your assessable income.

To claim business expenses:

   the money must have been spent for your business (not a private
   expense)
  if it is for a mix of business and private use, you can only claim the
  portion that is related to your business

  you must have a record to prove it.

Operating expenses you may be able to claim include:

  computer consumables (for example, printer ink)

  drop sheets

  insurance (for example, public liability insurance, professional
  indemnity insurance and personal accident and illness insurance)

  masking, gaffer or duct tape

  oil

  replacement belts for machines.

Protective clothing or items
You can generally claim a deduction for the cost of:

  protective clothing (such as hi-vis vests and steel-capped boots)

  protective and safety equipment as well as occupation health and
  safety equipment (for example, safety glasses, safety helmets and
  earmuffs, or sunscreen, sunhats and sunglasses where you are
  required to work outdoors).

  items that protect you or your employees from safety hazards
  involved in performing work duties (for example hand sanitiser,
  sneeze or cough guards, face masks, gloves, other personal
  protective equipment, antibacterial wipes and other cleaning
  supplies used for business).


Buying assets for your small business
If you are buying depreciating assets for your small business, such as
tools or machinery, and you choose to use the simplified depreciation
rules, you can immediately deduct the business portion of the cost of
eligible assets under instant asset write-off.

If you are lodging tax returns for income years ending between
6 October 2020 and 30 June 2023, you may be eligible for temporary
full expensing.
Examples of assets that you may be able to claim as an immediate
deduction under instant asset write-off include:

   a car or ute

   computers, laptops and tablets

   concrete mixers

   drills

   electric sanders

   electric saws

   grinders

   high-pressure water cleaners

   ladders

   lawn mowers

   leaf blowers

   nail guns

   shelving and storage

   tool-boxes

   work lights.


Car limit
A car limit applies to the cost of passenger vehicles (except a
motorcycle or similar vehicle) designed to carry a load less than one
tonne and fewer than 9 passengers. The car limit is:

   $69,674 for the 2025–26 income year

   $69,674 for the 2024–25 income year

   $68,108 for the 2023–24 income year

   $64,741 for the 2022–23 income year

   $60,733 for the 2021–22 income year.

If you purchase a car for your business and the car limit applies, the
instant asset write-off is limited to the business portion of the car limit
for the relevant year.
For yearly car limits, see Car limit.

Motor vehicle expenses

Media: Claiming deductions – Motor vehicle expenses
https://tv.ato.gov.au/ato-tv/media?v=bi9or7od7bf956      (Duration:
1:18)

As a small business, you will be able to claim motor vehicle expenses
to the extent the vehicle is used in carrying on your business. Your
business structure and type of vehicle you drive can affect which
method you should use to calculate your deductions.

For more information, see:

   Deductions for motor vehicle expenses

   Motor vehicle expense calculation methods.


Record keeping

Media: Record keeping to help your business thrive
https://tv.ato.gov.au/ato-tv/media?v=bi9or7odhsto8a      (Duration:
1:42)

You need to keep records that substantiate your business income and
expenses.

Your records must:

   explain all transactions

   be in writing (electronic or paper)

   be kept for 5 years (some records may need to be kept longer).

Depending on your tax obligations, you may also need to keep records
for:

   Fuel tax credits

   GST – goods and services tax

   Records relating to your employees and contractors.

You can keep your business records electronically or on paper, but
keeping electronic records makes some tasks easier.
  For more information, see Record keeping for business.

  Lodging your tax return
  You need to lodge a tax return if you carry on a business, even if your
  business hasn't earnt any income. There’s no threshold for business
  income, so you need to lodge a tax return even if you only earn $1.

  What you need to report and how you lodge your annual tax return for
  your business depends on your type of business entity.

  Services and support
  Find out about our range of tools and services that help make it easier
  for you to get your tax and superannuation right at:

     Supporting your small business

     Tax Time toolkit for small business

  Remember, you can also speak with a registered tax agent to help you
  with your tax.




  QC 54883



Our commitment to you
We are committed to providing you with accurate, consistent and clear
information to help you understand your rights and entitlements and meet
your obligations.

If you follow our information and it turns out to be incorrect, or it is
misleading and you make a mistake as a result, we will take that into
account when determining what action, if any, we should take.

Some of the information on this website applies to a specific financial year.
This is clearly marked. Make sure you have the information for the right year
before making decisions based on that information.

If you feel that our information does not fully cover your circumstances, or
you are unsure how it applies to you, contact us or seek professional
advice.
Copyright notice
© Australian Taxation Office for the Commonwealth of Australia

You are free to copy, adapt, modify, transmit and distribute this material as
you wish (but not in any way that suggests the ATO or the Commonwealth
endorses you or any of your services or products).
