                                                    Print whole section



Income statements
Find out how to access your end of year income statement
and what to do if its missing, incorrect, or not tax ready.



  Access your income statement
  How to find your income statement in ATO online services
  through myGov or the ATO app.




  Income statement not tax ready
  What to do if your employer hasn't finalised the data for your
  income statement and marked it as Tax ready.




  Lost or missing payment summary
  What to do if your employer hasn't provided you a payment
  summary or you can't find it.




  Incorrect reportable employer super
  contributions
  How to correct an income statement or payment summary if
  compulsory super is reported as reportable super contributions.




QC 103971
Access your income statement
How to find your income statement in ATO online services
through myGov or the ATO app.

Last updated 11 June 2024




    On this page
    How you receive your income statement

    Income statements through ATO online services

    Find your income statement in ATO online services

    Get your income statement from your tax agent




How you receive your income statement
Your employer will provide you with your end of year statement as
either:

   an income statement – if your employer reports to us through Single
   Touch Payroll (STP)

   a payment summary – if your employer is not yet reporting through
   STP they will continue to provide you with a payment summary by
   14 July.

Your employer should let you know if you will receive an income
statement or payment summary. You should talk to them if you are
unsure.

Your employer doesn't have to give you a payment summary if they
report through STP.

Your income statement is available to access in ATO online services
through myGov or the ATO app. If you don't have a myGov account,
you will need to create a myGov account and link it to the ATO.

Most employers have until 14 July to finalise their data. Your employer
will let you know if there are any delays in the finalisation of your
income statement.
If you have more than one employer
If you have more than one employer, you may receive both an income
statement and a payment summary. You will need to check that
income from your payment summary is in your tax return. Your
payment summary details may pre-fill for you if you lodge online,
otherwise you need to enter it manually.

Incorrect income statement
If your income statement information is incorrect, you should contact
your employer (or employers). If they have made an error, they can
usually correct it.

Find out what you can do if you have a lost or missing or incorrect
payment summary.


Income statements through ATO online
services
If your employer is reporting through STP, you will receive an income
statement.

You can find your income statement in ATO online services through
myGov or the ATO app.

Your income statement will show your year-to-date:

  salary and wages

  tax that has been withheld

  super.

You will need to wait until your employer marks your income statement
as 'Tax ready' before you prepare and lodge your tax return.

Employers have until 14 July to finalise their data.

It is important that you don't use any information that is not marked
'Tax ready' as your employer may finalise your income statement with
different amounts.

If you lodge before the statement is 'Tax ready', you may have to
amend your tax return.
We will send a notification to your myGov inbox when all of your
income statements are 'Tax ready'.

You will need to speak to your employer if after 31 July your income
statement is not tax ready in ATO online services.


Find your income statement in ATO online
services
To find your income statement, you can either sign in to:

  ATO online services through myGov

  ATO online services through the ATO app.


ATO online services through myGov
If you're accessing ATO online services through myGov, you need to:

  sign in to myGov

  select ATO online services

  select Employment

  select Income statement.

On the screen you will see your income from your employer or
employers for the income year, and the tax that has been withheld.


ATO online services through the ATO app
If you're accessing ATO online services through the ATO app, you need
to:

  login to ATO online services in the app

  select Employment

  select the income year.

If you can't access your information through ATO online services, you
can contact us for a copy of your income statement information.


Get your income statement from your tax
agent
Your tax agent will be able to access your income statement or
payment summary information through either:

   their software

   Online services for agents.

Your agent will need to wait until the income statement has been
marked as Tax ready to prepare and lodge your return.

Employers have until 14 July to finalise their data, they will let you
know if there are any delays in the finalisation of your income
statement.

We will send a notification to your myGov inbox when all of your
income statements are Tax ready.




QC 58694



Income statement not tax ready
What to do if your employer hasn't finalised the data for
your income statement and marked it as Tax ready.

Last updated 11 June 2024




    On this page
    If your income statement is not tax ready

    Not tax ready and your tax return

    Receiving both an income statement and a payment summary

    If you have more than one employer

    Keeping your records




If your income statement is not tax ready
When your employer finalises your tax and super details it will show
the status Tax ready. You can use the information in your income
statement when it is Tax ready.

You will see a red box in ATO online services that says Not tax ready if
your data hasn't been finalised by your employer. You will need to
speak to your employer to find out when they will finalise your
statement.

If your employer is unable to make your income statement Tax ready,
they will need to provide you with a payment summary. If your
employer is no longer in business you will need to estimate your
income and withholding details and include this in your return.


Not tax ready and your tax return
We recommend waiting until your income statement is Tax ready
before preparing and lodging your tax return. This is because the
amounts may change when your employer finalises your income
statement.

If you choose to lodge your tax return before your income statement
shows tax ready, you will need to review your information and any
amounts that are available through pre-fill. You will need to confirm the
information is correct before you submit your tax return.

Remember, if you choose to use information from your income
statement before it is tax ready to lodge your tax return:

  your employer may finalise your income statement with different
  amounts

  you may need to amend your tax return and additional tax may be
  payable.


Receiving both an income statement and a
payment summary
If you receive both an income statement and a payment summary from
the same employer, you will need to check with them which you should
use. They may each contain different income amounts.


If you have more than one employer
If you have more than one employer you may have more than one
income statement or payment summary. You might also receive an
income statement from one employer and a payment summary from
another.

You will need to check that the income from all income statements and
payment summaries are in your tax return. If you lodge your tax return
with myTax you can pre-fill this information.

You will still need to check that the information is all there and correct.
You might need to enter it manually or adjust the details if they are
incorrect.


Keeping your records
In order to prepare and lodge an accurate tax return and support the
claims you make, you need to keep thorough records.

You need to be able to show how you arrived at the income and tax
withheld figures. In some cases, you may need to provide written
evidence of how you work out the figures, if we ask you.




QC 16580



Lost or missing payment summary
What to do if your employer hasn't provided you a payment
summary or you can't find it.

Last updated 11 June 2024




    On this page
    Changes to payment summaries

    Lost, missing or destroyed payment summary

    Incorrect payment summary

    If you find your payment summary
    Keeping your records




Changes to payment summaries
Most employers now report your income and pay your tax and super
directly each pay day through Single Touch Payroll (STP).

You may not receive a payment summary from your employer if they
are reporting through STP. Instead, you get an income statement
through ATO online services in myGov.

There is no requirement for your employer to give you a payment
summary if they report through STP. If your employer is not yet
reporting through STP they will continue to provide you with a
payment summary by 14 July.

If you have more than one employer, you may receive both an income
statement and a payment summary.


Lost, missing or destroyed payment
summary
If your payment summary is lost, missing or destroyed you can get the
information you need by:

  requesting a copy from your employer or payer

  requesting a letter from your employer or payer stating details of
  your income and the amount of tax withheld

  using the prefilling service to automatically load your payment
  summary and other information into your tax return using myTax

  reviewing your payslips, timesheets and bank statements.

You no longer require a statutory declaration where you don't have a
copy of your payment summary.

If you are unable to get accurate information from these sources, you
will need to estimate your income and withholding details. Include the
estimates in your tax return.

Use our gross pay estimator, to help you estimate your income. This
will give you an estimate of your gross pay using your net pay for a
particular pay period, either weekly, fortnightly or monthly.
   Gross pay estimator




Incorrect payment summary
If your payment summary information is incorrect, you should contact
your employer (or employers). If they have made an error, they can
usually correct it.


If you find your payment summary
If you find your payment summary and haven't lodged your tax return,
make sure you use the amounts shown on your payment summary.

If you have already lodged your tax return and the amounts on your
payment summary are different, you must request an amendment to
your tax return.


Keeping your records
In order to prepare and lodge an accurate tax return and support the
claims you make, you need to keep thorough records.

You need to be able to show how you arrived at the income and tax
withheld figures. In some cases, you may need to provide written
evidence of how you work out the figures, if we ask you.




QC 72681



Incorrect reportable employer
super contributions
How to correct an income statement or payment summary
if compulsory super is reported as reportable super
contributions.

Last updated 11 June 2024
    On this page
    Reportable employer super contributions

    What to do if the super amounts are incorrect

    Lodge an amendment to your tax return




Reportable employer super contributions
Some employers incorrectly include compulsory super amounts as
reportable employer super contributions on their employees' income
statements or payment summaries. This includes:

  super guarantee contributions

  industrial agreement (award) super contributions.

Reportable employer super contributions should only include additional
super contributions made by an employer, for example, the super
contributions made on behalf of an employee under a salary sacrifice
arrangement.


What to do if the super amounts are
incorrect
If you have compulsory super amounts incorrectly included on your
income statement or payment summary, and:

  you haven't lodged your tax return, you can ask your employer to
  correct that figure

  have lodged your tax return, you lodge an amendment to your tax
  return.


Lodge an amendment to your tax return
If you have already lodged your tax return with the incorrect
information, you may need to lodge an amendment request. Lodge an
amendment if any of the following apply to you:

  Seniors and pensioner tax offset

  Superannuation contribution on behalf of your spouse tax offset
     Invalid and invalid carer tax offset

     Zone tax offset when claiming dependants

     Deduction for personal superannuation contributions

     Employee share scheme

     Liable for Medicare levy surcharge

     Entitled to superannuation co-contribution

     Higher Education Loan Program (HELP), Student Financial
     Supplement Scheme (SFSS), Student Start-up Loan (SSL) or Trade
     Support Loan (TSL) (Australian Apprenticeship Support Loans
     (AASL) from 1 January 2024) debt

     Benefits from or have to pay amounts to Centrelink or Child Support
     Agency

     Non-commercial business losses

     Low income super contribution for the 2016–17 and prior income
     years

     Low income superannuation tax offset for 2017–18 and future
     income years.




  QC 23296



Our commitment to you
We are committed to providing you with accurate, consistent and clear
information to help you understand your rights and entitlements and meet
your obligations.

If you follow our information and it turns out to be incorrect, or it is
misleading and you make a mistake as a result, we will take that into
account when determining what action, if any, we should take.

Some of the information on this website applies to a specific financial year.
This is clearly marked. Make sure you have the information for the right year
before making decisions based on that information.
If you feel that our information does not fully cover your circumstances, or
you are unsure how it applies to you, contact us or seek professional
advice.

Copyright notice
© Australian Taxation Office for the Commonwealth of Australia

You are free to copy, adapt, modify, transmit and distribute this material as
you wish (but not in any way that suggests the ATO or the Commonwealth
endorses you or any of your services or products).
