How trusts are assessed for land tax
  revenue.nsw.gov.au/taxes-duties-levies-royalties/land-tax/understanding-land-tax/types-of-landowners/trusts


Understand the different types of trusts, their eligibility for the NSW land tax threshold and
their potential liability for surcharge land tax.

Last updated: 25 August 2026
On this page
What is a trust?Surcharge land tax for trustsApplication of the threshold for different types
of trustsSpecial trustsFixed trustsBare trustsSuperannuation trustsTrusts created by a
willFamily unit trustsConcessional trustsCharitable trustsDocuments to provideProviding
accurate information and documentsContact the land tax team

What is a trust?
A trust is an arrangement where a trustee manages or holds a property for the benefit of
one or more individuals or organisations (known as a beneficiary).

The trustee has a duty to the beneficiaries, who are the beneficial owners of the trust
property.

You are considered to be the owner of the interest in the trust if you are a beneficiary or
unit holder in a fixed or family unit trust.

A trust may be liable for land tax. When calculating your land tax liability, you must
consider the value of your interest in the account.

Watch our video series on trusts to find out more.

Surcharge land tax for trusts
Trusts may be liable for surcharge land tax where the beneficiaries of a trust include
foreign persons.

Discretionary trust deeds are required to irrevocably exclude foreign beneficiaries to be
exempt from surcharge land tax.

Read more about how surcharge land tax can be applied to different trust structures
below.


Application of the threshold for different types of trusts
Some trust types are not eligible to receive the land tax threshold.

This means some owners may pay land tax even if their land value is below the threshold,
such as special trusts.


                                                                                                                1/9
Find out if your trust type is eligible for the land tax threshold below.


Special trusts
A special trust does not receive the land tax threshold.

A special trust is a trust that does not meet the criteria to be considered a concessional
trust or a fixed trust for land tax purposes.

A special trust is defined in section 3A of the Land Tax Management Act 1956 and can
include:

      family trusts
      discretionary trusts
      unit trusts, and
      trusts created by a will.

Special trusts are taxed at a flat rate of 1.6% for amounts up to the premium land tax
threshold, then at 2%.

You may also be liable for surcharge land tax in NSW if:

      any beneficiary is a foreign person, and
      the trust owns residential land in NSW.

With a special trust, the trustee, not the beneficiaries, are the only person who meets the
definition of an owner for land tax purposes.

The trustee of a special trust is considered a foreign person if:

      it is a discretionary trust that does not exclude foreign beneficiaries (see section 5D
      of the Land Tax Act 1956 and Commissioner's Practice Note: Foreign surcharges
      and discretionary trusts), or
      any beneficiary is an individual not ordinarily resident in Australia, or
      it is a foreign corporation, a foreign trust, or a foreign government, and
      it holds a substantial interest or aggregate substantial interest in the trust.

Example: Special trust land tax calculation

 Landowner            ABC Pty Ltd ATF ABC Family Trust


                      Property F

                      ABC Pty Ltd ATF ABC Family Trusts owns 100%
 Property
 ownership            Land value = $600,000




                                                                                                2/9
                     Special trusts do not receive the benefit of the land tax threshold

                     $600,000 (total land value) x $1.6% (general land tax rate) = $9,600

                     Note: A premium land tax marginal rate of 2% applies for special
 Calculation         trust on the total taxable land value above $6,571,000


 Land tax            $9,600
 payable




Back to top

Setting up or amending a discretionary trust to exclude foreign
beneficiaries for surcharge land tax

The trustee of a discretionary trust may be liable for foreign surcharges if any one of the
named beneficiaries or potential beneficiaries is a foreign person.

To avoid surcharge land tax discretionary trusts must be set up or amended to prevent
beneficiaries and potential beneficiaries that are foreign persons from receiving
distributions as to income and/or capital of the trust.

Should the trust deed contain named beneficiaries who are foreign persons, such
beneficiaries must be removed from the trust deed as beneficiaries.

It is not sufficient that named beneficiaries are merely prevented from receiving
distributions, such as through a general clause excluding foreign persons from being
beneficiaries.

The trust will be liable for surcharge land tax on any residential land held even if the trust
does not intend to distribute income and/or capital to the foreign persons who are
beneficiaries of the discretionary trust.

For a discretionary trust, each beneficiary or potential beneficiary to whom the trustee has
discretion to distribute the income or property is deemed to have the maximum
percentage interest in the income or property that the trustee may exercise discretion to
distribute to them.

A trustee will be considered foreign and liable to pay surcharge land tax on any residential
land held unless the trust satisfies both of the following criteria:

   1. No beneficiary or potential beneficiary of the trust is a foreign person (the "no
      foreign beneficiary requirement"), and
   2. The terms of the trust must not be capable of amendment that would result in a
      foreign person being a potential beneficiary (the "no amendment requirement").


                                                                                                 3/9
If both of the above criteria are not satisfied the trustee will be considered foreign.

For more information and examples refer to Commissioner's Practice Note: Foreign
surcharges and discretionary trusts.


Back to top

Fixed trusts
A fixed trust is eligible for the land tax threshold.

A fixed trust includes some unit trusts and bare trusts.

Fixed trust has the meanings given by section 3A(2) and section (3A) and (3B) of the
Land Tax Management Act 1956.

To qualify as a fixed trust, the trust deed must satisfy the following:

      the beneficiaries or unit holders are presently entitled to all the income of the trust,
      after payment of the proper expenses incurred by the trustee in authorised
      administration of the trust
      the beneficiaries or unit holders are presently entitled to the capital of the trust and
      may require the trustee to wind up the trust and distribute the trust property or the
      net proceeds of the trust
      the entitlements cannot be removed, restricted or otherwise affected by the exercise
      of any discretion, or by a failure to exercise any discretion, conferred on a person by
      the trust deed

Where a trust is a unit trust it must also:

      only one class of units can be issued, and the proportion of trust capital a unit holder
      is entitled to on winding up or surrender of units must be fixed, and must be the
      same as the proportion of income of the trust to which the unit holder is entitled.
      if a beneficiary or a unit holder owns other taxable land, or is a special trust, they
      are assessed on the combined value of their interest of the land held in the trust and
      any other taxable land owned. They may be entitled to a secondary deduction to
      prevent double taxation.

Generally, foreign person beneficiaries of a fixed trust are individually liable for any
surcharge liability, not the trust/trustee.

In cases where the trustee and the beneficiaries of a fixed trust (along with any other joint
owners) are all natural persons, a principal place of residence exemption (PPR) can be
applied provided that the beneficiaries resides in the property and all relevant eligibility
requirements the PPR exemption are met.

 Open all


                                                                                                 4/9
Amending a unit trust to receive the benefit of the land tax threshold
A unit trust that does not meet the relevant criteria set out in section 3A(3B) of the Land
Tax Management Act 1956, can amend its trust deed so it is considered a fixed trust for
future tax years.

Before you amend a trust deed, you should consider seeking professional advice as any
amendment may change the way your trust is considered for other circumstances.

To ensure amended deeds meet the requirements, you will need to lodge a return via
Land Tax Online and upload the following documents:

      an executed copy of the amended deed trust, and
      an executed full copy of the original trust deed, if you have not already given it to us.
      a copy of the unit holder register showing the unit holdings as at the date of the
      amending deed.

Follow these steps to lodge a return in Land Tax Online.

Learn more about amending a unit trust deed in the Commissioner’s Practice Note: Unit
trust deed amendments.

Liability of beneficiaries/unit holders in a fixed trust
If a trust satisfies the relevant criteria, the beneficiaries of the trust are taken to be owners
of an equitable estate in the land and may be liable for land tax and any surcharge land
tax (if applicable), as if they were legal owners of the land.

They are treated as secondary taxpayers as per section 25 of the Land Tax Management
Act 1956.

Therefore, a beneficiaries/unit holder’s interest in the trust, which owns other taxable land,
or is a special trust, is assessed on the combined value of their interest in the land held in
the trust, and any other taxable land owned.

They may be entitled to a secondary deduction to prevent double taxation.

All fixed trusts must provide details of the beneficiaries/unit holders.

Assessing a unit trust
A unit trust may be a special trust, a fixed trust or a family unit trust.

To be a fixed trust, certain criteria apply.

If they do not apply, the trustee can restructure the trust deed to meet the criteria, but the
threshold will only apply from the next tax year.

Unit trusts must meet the criteria outlined in section 3A(3B) of the Land Tax Management
Act 1956 to be considered a fixed trust.




                                                                                                    5/9
A trustee must lodge a land tax return, if the land is subject to a trust. A copy of the trust
deed should be lodged with the return.

If a beneficiary or a unit holder owns other taxable land, or is a special trust, they are
assessed on the combined value of their interest of the land held in the trust and any
other taxable land owned. They may be entitled to a secondary deduction to prevent
double taxation.


Back to top

Bare trusts
A bare trust is taxed with the benefit of the land tax threshold.

A bare trust is a type of fixed trust, where the trustee and defined beneficiaries have
complete control of the trust.

Given their structure, the land tax implications of bare trusts vary.

Bare trusts are required to submit a copy of the bare trust deed.

Superannuation trusts
A superannuation trust receives the land tax threshold.

A superannuation trust can be:

      a complying superannuation fund
      a complying approved deposit fund, or
      a pooled superannuation trust under sections 42, 43 and 44 of the Superannuation
      Industry (Supervision) Act 1993.

If a superannuation trust is not a complying or pooled trust, it is a special trust and will not
receive the benefit of the land tax threshold.

Trusts created by a will
A fixed testamentary trust created by a will receives the land tax threshold.

A discretionary testamentary trust created by a will may receive the land tax threshold for
a period of 2 years from the date of death of the testator.

After this period the trust will be considered a special trust. Special trusts do not receive
the land tax threshold.

A concessional testamentary trust created by a will is considered a fixed trust and will
receive the land tax threshold while all the beneficiaries are minors (children under 18
years). The terms of the trust will determine what happens when the eldest beneficiary

                                                                                                   6/9
turns 18.


Family unit trusts
Some family unit trusts receive the land tax threshold.

Certain criteria must be met to qualify as a family unit trust. Family unit trust has the
meaning given by Schedule 1AA (2) of the Land Tax Management Act 1956.

A family unit trust is classified as a fixed trust when:

      land was held at midnight on 31 December 2005 with a taxable value of $1 million
      or less
      the unit holders are entitled to a fixed proportion of any distribution of income or
      capital of the trust made by the trustee, based on the proportion of income or capital
      units that each person owned in the trust.
      95% more of the units are owned by the same family group.

Note: If the trust acquires additional land after midnight 31 December 2005 that makes
the combined taxable land over $1 million, the trust will be assessed as a special trust for
the tax year following the purchase.

A family group consists of:

      people who are related to each other by blood, as well as adopted children and their
      spouses
      the ultimate beneficiary, if any of the units are owned by a trustee - this excludes
      discretionary trusts.
      If a person holds units as trustee – e.g. as trustee of a complying superannuation
      trust - and the members of the trust are all members of the same family group, the
      units will be regarded as being owned by members of the same family group for the
      purposes of determining whether the 95% test is satisfied.

Note: If any new units are issued, redeemed or cancelled, the trust will continue to be
assessed as a fixed trust, provided the proportion of units owned by members of the
same family group remains at least 95%.

If the trust does not meet this requirement, it will become liable as a “special trust” for the
following land tax year.


Back to top

Concessional trusts
A concessional trust receives the land tax threshold.

Certain criteria must be met to qualify as a concessional trust.


                                                                                                  7/9
A concessional trust has the meanings given by section 3B of the Land Tax Management
Act 1956.

These trusts hold land for the benefit of someone who is:

     under 18 years old,
     subject to a guardianship order under the Guardianship Act 1987
     a person in the relevant group within the meaning of section 2A of the Coroners Act
     2009, or
     the principal beneficiary of a special disability trust (within the meaning of section
     1209L of the Social Security Act 1991 of the Commonwealth).

Charitable trusts
A charitable trust is created to relieve poverty, to advance education or religion, or to
provide a community benefit.

A charitable trust can apply for an exemption or concession.

If the trust is accepted as a charitable trust all land owned by the trust is exempt from land
tax.

Documents to provide
You must provide the following information to Revenue NSW when you own land in New
South Wales as part of a trust.

Open the heading for more details.

 Open all
Unit trusts
      A copy of the executed and dated trust deed and all executed amendments to the
      trust deed.
      A certified copy of the unit register for your trust.
      The percentage of interest held by each unit holder.
      A copy of the executed trust deed for any unit holders who are trusts.
      The last known address for each unit holder if not shown in the unit register.

Estate/testamentary trusts
     A copy of the will and probate.
     The beneficiaries details.

Any other trust
     A copy of the executed and dated trust deed and all executed amendments to the
     trust deed.
     A copy of the executed deed that irrevocably excludes foreign beneficiaries as per
     section 5D of the Land Tax Act 1956.


                                                                                                 8/9
     The foreign person status of the trust.

Land Tax Online provides a secure and private way to send documents and other
information to us.

Learn how to update your land tax details in Land Tax Online.

Providing accurate information and documents
Providing accurate documentation helps us assess your matter efficiently and ensure the
correct outcome for your circumstances.

Providing false or misleading documents to obtain a financial advantage will not be
accepted. Where such documents are provided, this may constitute fraud and may be
referred to our Legal team for further consideration and penalty.

Penalties for false and misleading information
Applicants must provide information that is true, correct and not misleading, nor should
they willfully destroy records.

Under the Taxation Administration Act 1996, penalties may be imposed where a person:

     includes or provides information that is false or misleading
     deliberately fails to comply with requests for information
     willfully destroys records.

If found guilty, a person may be liable for a maximum penalty of:

     500 penalty units ($55,000) for a first offence
     1,000 penalty units ($110,000) and/or 2 years imprisonment for a second or
     subsequent offence.

Contact the land tax team
If you have a question about land tax contact us.




                                                                                           9/9
