                                                  Print whole section



Rental expenses
Check the expenses you can claim as a deduction for your
rental property.



  How to claim rental expenses
  When to apportion and claim rental expenses, what you can’t
  claim, and how to include deductions in your tax return.




  Common property expenses
  Check the common rental expenses you can claim a deduction
  for.




  Depreciating assets in rental properties
  How to claim a deduction for depreciating assets and work out
  decline in value.




  Repair and maintenance expenses
  Find out how and when to claim your repair and maintenance
  expenses.




  Capital expenses
  What to do with your capital expenses, including capital works,


  Borrowing expenses
  Find out which borrowing expenses you can claim, and how to
  claim them.




  Interest expenses
  Find out which interest expenses you can claim and what to do if
  your loan account is used for private purposes.




  Rental properties and travel expenses
  If you have a residential rental property, you may not be able to
  claim a deduction for related travel expenses.




  Asbestos-affected properties
  If you own an asbestos-affected investment property, check the
  deductions you can claim. CGT may apply if you sell it.




  Apartment building defect expenses
  If you own an apartment in a building complex, you may be able
  to claim deductions for shared expenses to fix defects.




QC 103903



How to claim rental expenses
When to apportion and claim rental expenses, what you
can’t claim, and how to include deductions in your tax
return.
Last updated 23 July 2026




            Recent negative gearing changes
            Recent changes to negative gearing announced in the
            2026–27 Federal Budget don’t apply in the 2025–26 tax
            return.


Rental expense categories
There are 3 rental expense categories, those for which you:

   can claim a deduction now (in the income year you incur the
   expense) – for example, interest on loans, council rates, repairs and
   maintenance and depreciating assets costing $300 or less

   can claim a deduction over several years – for example, capital
   works, borrowing expenses and the decline in value of depreciating
   assets that cost more than $300

   can't claim a deduction – for example, personal expenses, including
   expenses arising from your personal use of the property, some
   expenses of a capital nature and the purchase of second-hand (or
   used) depreciating assets after 9 May 2017.

You can claim expenditure such as interest on loans, local council,
water and sewerage rates, land taxes and emergency service levies
you incur prior to using it provided you are holding it to produce
assessable rental income. Evidence of your holding the property to
produce rental income, such as communications with real estate
agents or rental managers, must be kept. You won't be holding the
property to produce rental income if you have decided not to rent it
out – for example, if you decide to use the property for private
purposes.

If the land is vacant under the vacant land provisions, you generally
can't claim deductions for expenses incurred in holding land before the
property can be occupied and held to produce assessable rental
income.

If your rental property is used as a holiday home, you may not be able
to claim your ownership and use expenses. For more information, see
Holiday homes.
It is important to claim each expense under the correct expense type
to make sure you treat it correctly for tax purposes.


Claim the right amount of expenses –
methods of apportionment
You will need to work out the amount of the expense that relates to
your income-producing activities (apportion your expenses), if any of
the following apply:

  your property is only held to produce assessable rental income for
  part of the year

  your property is treated as vacant land for part of the year

  you use your property for private or personal purposes for part of
  the year

  your property is your holiday home

  you only use part of your property to earn rent

  you rent your property at less than market rates (non-commercial
  rates)

  you use your investment loan for private purposes.

If your property is your holiday home, you can't claim deductions for
ownership and use of the property unless it is used (or held for use)
mainly to produce rental income.

If you co-own your rental property with someone, rental income and
expenses must be attributed to each co-owner according to your legal
interest in the property.

Expenses, other than those that aren't allowable because your
property is a holiday home, need to be apportioned on a fair and
reasonable basis if your rental property is used for more than one
purpose during the income year. For example, if your rental property is
used, or held to, produce assessable income and you also use it for
private purposes, your expenses will need to be apportioned.

What is fair and reasonable usually depends on the:

  period of time the property was rented (time-based method)

  area of the property rented (area-based method).
You may need to use a combination of the time-based apportionment
and the area-based method if you rented out part of your property for
part (or parts) of the income year.

Your expenses may also need to be apportioned if you charge rent
which is less than the market value. If the rent is assessable, it's
considered fair and reasonable in these circumstances to apportion for
your private and domestic use of the property by limiting the
deductible rental expenses to the amount of the rental income you
receive. For more information on how to apportion deductions when
you charge less than market rates for rent, see Other methods.

If the rent isn't assessable, no expenses will be allowed as deductions.
For more information on when rent will and won't be assessable, see
Rental income you must declare.

You don't need to apportion expenses that relate solely to renting out
the property, such as advertising for tenants and real estate
commissions. These are fully deductible in the year they are incurred.

Time-based method
To work out your rental property deductions for periods when you
used (or held) the property to earn assessable rental income using the
time-based method, use the following formula:

    [(days used to produce income + days held to produce
    income) ÷ number of days in the income year you owned the
    property] × expenses

Where:

    The 'days used to produce income' is the number of days your
    property is occupied for rent, which includes days for which rent is
    paid even if the property is not physically occupied.

    The 'days held to produce income' is the number of days your
    property is unoccupied but available for rent on commercial terms.

If you rent out a room in your home, your property won't be available
for rent on commercial terms on days when the room is unoccupied
during the income year. This means your 'days held to produce income'
will be zero and only those days where the room is rented will be taken
into account.

When there is a clear change in the use of your rental property during
the income year, for example, when your property starts or stops being
used as a rental, the time-based method can be used to apportion
your expenses.

The change of use must be definite and will be determined based on
the actual use of the property. The use of a rental property doesn't
change due to fluctuations in the use of the property due to seasonal
patterns, such as a ski lodge or a beach house.



  Example 1: change in use of rental property
  Sunita owns a property in Geraldton which she has rented out as
  a long-term rental for 8 years. After she retires, Sunita decides to
  move into the Geraldton property.

  The tenants move out on 1 March and Sunita moves into the
  property a couple of weeks later. From 2 March, the property is
  used by Sunita for private purposes.

  During the income year (which is not a leap year), Sunita incurs:

     interest expenses and rates expenses of $21,596

     repair expenses (which relate solely to damage caused by the
     tenant) of $951

     real estate commission expenses of $1,664.

  Sunita can claim a deduction of $1,664 for the real estate
  commission expenses and a deduction of $951 for the repair
  expenses. These expenses don't need to be apportioned
  because they relate solely to the period she rented the property
  out.

  Sunita must apportion the other expenses because the property
  stopped being a rental part way through the income year. Sunita
  calculates the number of days the property was used to produce
  income as 245 days (period from 1 July to 2 March).

  Using the time-based method, Sunita calculates her interest,
  rates and repair expenses as:

  245 days ÷ 365 days × $21,596 = $14,496

  The total deductions Sunita can claim for the income year is
  $17,111 ($14,496 + $951 + $1,664).
Example 2: apportionment for private use and days
not held to produce income
Daniel and Kate are both chefs. They own a cottage in an area
that is popular with summer holidaymakers but has limited rental
potential during the colder seasons.

In October, Daniel and Kate move into their cottage so they can
work at a nearby restaurant. Their contracts are for 6 months
from October to March the following year.

Apart from living in the cottage for 6 months to work in the area,
Daniel and Kate don’t use it. As the cottage hasn't been used by
Daniel and Kate for their holidays and recreation (or the holidays
and recreation of their family and friends), the cottage isn't their
holiday home.

When they are not living in the house, Daniel and Kate
occasionally rent the property to itinerant workers based on word
of mouth only. Daniel and Kate only rent the house out for
14 days of the year.

The property isn't held to produce income during the periods the
property is unoccupied because it isn't actively advertised or
managed as a rental property during that time.

During the income year, Daniel and Kate receive rent of $1,852
and incur interest expenses, electricity, council rates and water
rates of $16,894 for the cottage.

Daniel and Kate apportion their interest expenses, electricity,
council and water rates on a time basis, using the days the
cottage was used to produce income (14 days out of 365 days)
and calculate them as follows:

14 days ÷ 365 days × $16,894 = $648

Daniel and Kate's total rental deductions will be $648.

As they own the property jointly, Daneil and Kate will each
declare 50% of the rental income (50% × $1,852 = $926) and
claim 50% of the rental expense as a deduction
($648 × 50% = $324).
Example 3: apportionment for private use of holiday
home used (or held to use) mainly to produce rental
income
Gail and Craig jointly own a rental property which they also use
as a holiday home. They advertise the property for rent through a
real estate agent. The rental terms, including the amount of rent,
for the property are similar to comparable properties in the area.
Gail and Craig have instructed the real estate agent to actively
monitor requests for bookings so they can maximise occupancy
for the property.

Gail and Craig use the property themselves for 30 days during
the year when it isn't rented and in a period when it is unlikely to
be rented.

Gail and Craig's holiday home is used (or held for use) mainly to
produce rental income because they maximise occupancy and
rental income by getting their real estate agent to actively
monitor requests and by not blocking it out for their personal use.
Also, when they do use it, it is during periods when the property
isn't already rented and is unlikely to be rented.

Excluding the 30 days Gail and Craig use it, it is rented or held for
rent for 335 days during the income year.

During the year, Gail and Craig's expenses for the property are
$36,628. This includes:

  $1,828 for the agent's commission and the cost of advertising
  for tenants

  interest on the funds borrowed to purchase the property

  insurance

  maintenance costs

  council rates

  the decline in value of depreciating assets and capital works
  deductions.
  Gail and Craig claim the full $1,828 as a deduction for the agent's
  commission and costs of advertising for tenants. They can also
  claim deductions for their other expenses ($34,800) using the
  time-based method. Gail and Craig will need to apportion their
  deduction for the year (which is not a leap year) as follows:

  335 ÷ 365 × $34,800 = $31,940

  Gail and Craig can rental deductions of $33,768
  ($31,940 + $1,828). However, as they own the property jointly,
  Gail and Craig will each be entitled to claim rental deductions of
  $16,884 ($33,768 x 50%).



Area-based method
If you rent out part of your property (for example, the lower floor of a
2-floor property or a bedroom in your home) you need to work out
your expenses using the area-based method. You must also apportion
your expenses using the time-based method if you only rented that
separate part of your property for part of the year.

The formula for apportioning expenses using the area-based method
is:

    [A + (B ÷ 2) ÷ C] × expenses incurred

Where:

  A is the floor area of the property solely occupied by the tenant

  B is the floor area of the common areas

  C is the floor area of the whole property.




  Example 1: apportionment using area-based method
  Kim owns a 2-storey townhouse and rents out the bottom floor
  to a long-term tenant. They each have exclusive possession of
  their floor. They share the use of the gardens around the house.

  The top floor has a large deck and is 55 square metres, the
  bottom floor is 45 square metres, and the gardens are
35 square metres. The total property is 135 square metres
(55 + 45 + 35 = 135).

Kim would work out her apportionment percentage using the
area-based method as follows:

[45 square metres + (35 square metres ÷ 2)] ÷ 135 square metres = 0.4629

0.4629 x 100 = 46.3%.

Kim can claim 46.3% of the allowable expenses she incurs
related to the property as a deduction.




Example 2: apportionment using area-based method
and time-based method
Leanne has a 2-bedroom, 2-bathroom unit in a high-rise
apartment. Leanne lives alone and mainly uses the master
bedroom and ensuite bathroom. The second bedroom and main
bathroom is accessible from the common areas of the unit
including the lounge, kitchen and balcony and are mainly used by
visitors.

Part way through the year, Leanne decides to let out the second
bedroom using a sharing economy platform to earn extra income.
She actively monitors replies from the listing and doesn't refuse
guests when the room is available. Leanne rents the second
bedroom of her property for 100 days during the income year.

The unit is 80 square metres in total. The second bedroom being
let is 10 square metres. Leanne also gives paying guests access
to common areas including the main bathroom, kitchen, lounge
and balcony, which totals 50 square metres and allows guests
access to her wi-fi for free if they wish to.

For the period guests are staying and have access to the
common areas (along with Leanne), Leanne can claim 50% of the
deductible portion of associated costs related to the common
areas.

During the income year, Leanne incurs interest expenses, rates,
body corporate fees, capital works deductions, electricity and
internet expenses for the property of $26,153 and sharing
platform commission fees of $425.

To apportion her expenses and work out how much she can
claim as a deduction, Leanne must use the area-based method.
Leanne must also use the time-based method, because she only
rented her second bedroom for 100 days during the income year.

Even if Leanne had the room listed for rent for the whole income
year, the days it was unoccupied wouldn't be treated as days
held to produce income. This is because when the room is not
being rented out, it is treated as being used privately by Leanne
as part of her home. Therefore, the number of days held to
produce income will be zero.

Step 1 – apply the area-based method

Leanne works out the percentage of the house her guests have
access to when they are there using the area-based method as
follows:

10 square metres + (50 square metres ÷ 2) ÷ 80 square metres = 0.4375

0.4375 × 100 = 43.75%

Step 2 – apply the time-based method

Leanne lets out the spare bedroom of her property, being her
home, for 100 days of the year (which is not a leap year). As she
has rented the bedroom out for only part of the income year, she
will also need to apportion her deductible expenses using the
time-based method. Leanne uses the following formula:

100 days used to produce income ÷ 365 days = 0.27397

0.27397 × 100 = 27.4%

By multiplying the time-based method and area-based method
together, Leanne will be able to work out what percentage of her
yearly expenses are deductible.

43.75% × 27.4% = 11.99%

Leanne can claim a deduction for 11.99% of her interest
expenses, rates, body corporate fees, capital works deductions,
electricity and internet expenses ($26,153 x 11.99% = $3,136).
Leanne can also claim 100% of the expenses associated solely
  with renting out the second bedroom, that is, the sharing
  economy platform's service fees or commission ($425).

  For the income year, Leanne can claim a deduction for rental
  expenses of $3,561 ($3,136 + $425).




Other methods
If you are renting your property to family or friends and not charging
rent at a market rate, it is likely that your property has a mixed use,
these uses are:

  producing assessable rental income

  a private or domestic use of providing accommodation for your
  family and friends.

In these circumstances, your deductions must be apportioned to
exclude the amount related to the private or domestic use of the
property. Where the expenses you incur that would otherwise be
deductible exceed the amount of rent you receive, a fair and
reasonable way to apportion your expenses is to limit them to the
amount of rental income derived from the property. This will result in
no net rental income or loss.




  Example: rent below market rate to family
  Jana rents a property she owns to her mother for her to live in.
  Although Jana's mother has signed a standard lease agreement,
  Jana has set the rent at a below market rates.

  Jana provides the discount for private or domestic reasons to
  assist her mother who can't afford to pay rent at the market rate.

  During the income year Jana receives rent of $15,600 from her
  mother and she incurs rental expenses, including mortgage
  interest expenses, insurance, council and water rates and capital
  works of $20,578.

  The rent that Jana receives from her mother ($15,600) is
  assessable rental income. As Jana's deductible expenses exceed
   the amount of rent Jana receives, she limits her deductions
   related to property for mortgage interest, insurance capital
   works, council and water rates to the amount of rent received
   from her mother ($15,600).

   Jana has no net rental income or loss.




If you rent your property to family and friends at the market rate of
rent, you don't need to apportion your expenses.

To establish that the property has been rented at a market rate, you
will need to provide evidence to show how the market rate was
calculated at the time the rent amount was set. For example, a real
estate rent valuation or listings for similar properties available in the
area the property is located at the same time your property was
available for rent.

For more information, see:

   TR 2026/1 Income tax: rental property income and deductions for
   individuals who are not in business

   PCG 2026/2 Apportionment of rental property deductions – ATO
   compliance approach

   PCG 2026/3 Application of section 26-50 of the Income Tax
   Assessment Act 1997 to holiday homes that you also rent out – ATO
   compliance approach.


Positive or negative gearing
Your rental property is:

   positively geared if your deductible expenses are less than the
   income you earn from the property – you make a profit from renting
   out your property

   negatively geared if your deductible expenses are more than the
   income you earn from the property. You can claim deductions for
   rental expenses against your rental and other income – such as
   salary, wages or business income. If your other income isn’t enough
   to absorb the loss, you can carry forward your loss to the next
   income year. For more information on the changes to negative
  gearing announced in the 2026–27 Federal Budget, see Tax reform
  – Boosting home ownership – Reforming negative gearing and
  capital gains tax.


Expenses you can’t claim
You can’t claim a deduction for:

  expenses not actually paid by you, such as water or electricity
  charges paid by your tenants

  acquisition and disposal costs, including the purchase cost,
  conveyancing and advertising costs (instead, these are usually
  included in the property's cost base, which would reduce any
  capital gains tax when you sell the property)

  decline in value of second hand depreciating assets

  ownership or use expenses for a holiday home that isn't used (or
  held for use) mainly to produce rental income

  GST credits for anything you purchase to lease the premises – GST
  doesn't apply to residential rental properties, however, when
  claiming the expense as a deduction, you claim the total amount
  you've paid (inclusive of GST, if applicable).

Find out about other expenses you can’t claim below.

Deductions for vacant land
In most cases, you can’t claim a deduction for the cost of holding
vacant land. For more information, see Deductions for vacant land.


Supplier ABNs
When you hire a contractor for services and repairs connected with
your rental property, you will need to check they have an Australian
business number (ABN). If they don't provide you with their ABN, you
may have to withhold 47% from the payment you make to them and
transfer that withheld amount to us.

You may not be able to claim deductions for these expenses if you
don't withhold when you were required to.
How to include rental expenses in your tax
return
If you lodge your own tax return using myTax, you need to select:

   'You had Australian interest, or other Australian income or losses
   from investments or property'

   'Other foreign income' for overseas property.

Once you have completed the rental property details and the related
income fields, you can add your expenses in the 'Rental expenses'
fields.


Including rental income and expenses in
myTax

Media: How to include rental income and expenses in myTax
https://tv.ato.gov.au/media/bd1bdiubtjsfhw   (Duration: 1:56)




QC 23633



Common property expenses
Check the common rental expenses you can claim a
deduction for.

Last updated 21 May 2026




Expenses you can claim
You can claim an immediate deduction for some expenses in the
income year you incur them provided your property is held to produce
assessable income, that is, rented or available to rent on commercial
terms.

If your rental property is also your holiday home, you can only claim an
immediate deduction for ownership and use expenses, such as body
corporate fees and land tax, if you used the property (or held it for
use) mainly to produce rental income. For more information about
what expenses you can and can't claim for a holiday home, see
Holiday homes.

To claim a deduction you must:

  actually incur the cost – you can't claim a deduction where the cost
  is paid by the tenant or someone else

  keep adequate records to prove your deductions if we ask for
  evidence.

There are some rental expenses you must claim over several years –
for example, capital works and borrowing expenses.

Expenses you can claim an immediate deduction for include:

  advertising for tenants

  body corporate administrative fund fees and charges

  council rates, water charges, land tax

  cleaning, gardening and lawn mowing

  pest control

  insurance (building, contents, public liability, loss of rent)

  interest expenses

  pre-paid expenses

  property agent's fees and commission

  repairs and maintenance

  legal expenses.

For more information, see Rental properties guide.


Body corporate administrative fund fees
and charges
You may be able to claim a deduction for body corporate fees and
charges you pay. Not all body corporate fees are deductible in full in
the income year you incur them.

Body corporate fees are a cost you pay to the body corporate or strata
to manage the property and maintain common areas. Strata title body
corporates are constituted under the strata title legislation of the
various states and territories.

These fees and charges may go towards payments to:

  cover the cost of day-to-day expenses to maintain and manage the
  building – for example, insurance premiums, maintenance of
  gardens and management of the body corporate itself

  a special purpose fund, for a specific expense – for example, roof
  repairs and building insurance.

Regular payments you make to body corporate administration funds or
general purpose sinking funds for ongoing administration and general
maintenance are considered to be payments for the provision of
services by the body corporate. You can claim an immediate deduction
for these regular payments at the time you incur them.

You can’t claim a deduction for a special levy you are required by the
body corporate to pay to fund a particular capital improvement. You
may be able to claim a capital works deduction for the cost of capital
improvements or repairs of a capital nature once the work is
completed. The cost must also be charged to either the special
purpose fund or the general purpose sinking fund, if a special
contribution has been levied.

For a summary fact sheet of what you can and can't claim, go to the
ATO Publication Ordering Service to download Rental property body
corporate fees and charges (NAT 75375, PDF 222KB) .


Pre-paid expenses
A pre-paid expense is a cost you incur under an agreement for
services to be done (in whole or in part) in a later income year. For
example, payment of an insurance premium on 1 January that provides
cover for the entire calendar year or pre-paid interest on money you
borrow.

You can generally claim an immediate deduction in the income year
you make the prepayment for:

  expenses of less than $1,000

  expenses of $1,000 or more where the eligible service period is
  12 months or less and ends in the next income year (such as
   payment of an annual insurance premium part way through an
   income year).

The eligible service period is the time taken for a thing to be done
under an agreement in return for payment.

The eligible service period begins on the later of either:

   the day the thing under the agreement begins to be done

   the day the expense is incurred.

The eligible service period continues until the earlier of:

   the end of the last day the thing under the agreement stops being
   done

   10 years.

A pre-paid expense for your rental property of more than $1,000,
where the eligible service period is greater than 12 months, or ends
later than the following income year, will have to be spread over the
shorter of either:

   the eligible service period

   10 years.

For more information, see Deductions for prepaid expenses.


Legal expenses
Rental property legal expenses are costs you incur to prepare, register,
protect and manage your rental property.

You can claim a deduction for some of the legal expenses you incur to
produce your rental income. You can claim these expenses in the
income year you incur them.

You can claim the cost of the following as deductions:

   evicting a non-paying tenant

   expenses for taking court action for loss of rental income

   defending a claim for damages from injuries suffered by a third
   party on your rental property.

You can also claim a deduction for solicitor’s fees for the preparation of
loan documents as borrowing expenses. If the total of your borrowing
expenses is more than $100, your deduction is spread over the life of
the loan or 5 years, whichever is less.

Most other legal expenses you incur relating to your rental property
are capital and can’t be claimed as a deduction. The following legal
expenses may be included in the cost base when you sell the
property:

  solicitor's fees for the purchase or sale of the property

  legal costs associated with resisting land resumption

  legal costs associated with defending your title to the property (for
  example, defending an action by the mortgagee to take possession
  of the property where you have defaulted under the loan).


Land tax expenses
If you earn rental income from a property, you can claim a deduction
for land tax. Include the deduction in the income year the liability
relates to, not the year you pay it.

State authorities sometimes issue land tax assessments for different
periods of time, including amounts from earlier years (arrears). If you
pay an amount in arrears, you must amend your tax return for the
relevant year so the deduction is claimed correctly.

You can claim a land tax deduction for:

  the current year as a deduction in your tax return

  prior years by lodging an amendment for the year the liability relates
  to.

Land tax deductions don't need to be apportioned in the income year
you:

  start to use the property as your main residence

  sell the property.

You need to declare any land tax adjustments as rental income when
you sell the property.

For more information, see Rental properties guide – land tax.
QC 103905



Depreciating assets in rental
properties
How to claim a deduction for depreciating assets and work
out decline in value.

Last updated 21 May 2026




Depreciating assets
Depreciating assets are items that can be described as plant, that
don't form part of rental property premises. Premises refers to the
actual structure of the rental property's building.

Under the uniform capital allowance rules, you can claim a deduction
for the decline in value of depreciating assets used for income-
producing purposes, for example a dishwasher in a rental property
which is held to produce assessable income, that is, rented or available
to rent on commercial terms.

Some assets don't decline in value, such as land, trading stock and
some intangible assets (for example, goodwill).

We recommend you keep a spreadsheet (as a minimum) for your
depreciating assets as part of your record keeping. A quantity surveyor
can prepare a report at the time a rental property is purchased.

Depreciating assets are usually:

   separately identifiable

   unlikely to be permanent

   replaced within a relatively short period

   not part of the structure of the building.

None of these factors alone can determine if an item is part of the
premises. They must all be considered together.

For a list of common rental property items and their treatment as
depreciating assets or capital works, see Residential rental property
items.

You can claim a deduction for the item's decline in value. You can
choose to use either:

  the effective life the Commissioner determines for these assets

  your own reasonable estimate of the effective life.

You must keep records to show how you work out the decline in value.

For a summary of the difference between repairs, maintenance and
capital expenses, go to the ATO Publication Ordering Service to
download Rental repairs, maintenance and capital expense
(NAT 75208, PDF 242KB) .


Decline in value of depreciating assets
Depreciating assets have an effective useful life and are reasonably
expected to decline in value over time.

For depreciating assets costing more than $300, you can claim
deductions for the decline in value over its effective useful life.
Examples of such assets in your rental property or holiday home
include:

  floating timber flooring

  carpets

  curtains

  appliances like a washing machine or fridge

  furniture.

When you purchase a rental property, either new or second-hand, you
have bought a building plus separate depreciating assets, such as air
conditioners, stoves and other items.

There are limitations that apply to decline in value of second-hand
depreciating assets.

The decline in value of a depreciating asset starts when you first use it
or install it ready for use – it doesn't matter whether it's for a private
purpose or to earn assessable income. For example, if you purchased
and installed a new asset on 1 January and used it for private purposes
for the first 2 weeks, you calculate the decline in value from that date.
However, your deduction must be reduced for any private use of the
asset.

Special rules apply to some assets that may allow you to claim
deductions for their decline in value (depreciation) more quickly.

This video explains depreciating assets and when you can claim them
as a deduction for a rental property.


Media: Claiming depreciating assets
https://tv.ato.gov.au/ato-tv/media?v=bd1bdiun85ity3        (Duration:
2:21)


Depreciating assets costing $300 or less
Assets costing $300 or less can be claimed as an immediate deduction
(a full deduction) in the income year you used the asset for a taxable
purpose.

You can't claim an immediate deduction if the asset is part of a set of
assets that together cost more than $300. For example, if you buy
4 dining chairs each costing $250 for your rental property you can't
treat them as separate assets.


New assets
You can claim the decline in value of new depreciating assets.

This includes depreciating assets purchased with a newly built or
substantially renovated property, if no one was previously entitled to a
deduction for the decline in value, and either:

  no one resided at the property before you acquired it

  the asset was installed for use, or used at the property, and you
  acquired the property within 6 months of it being newly built or
  substantially renovated.




  Example: claiming the decline in value of
  depreciating assets
  Kerrie purchased a unit off-the-plan from a developer as an
  investment (it was new and no one lived in it prior to that time).
The property included depreciating assets such as curtains and
furniture installed before settlement and the transfer of title to
Kerrie.

Kerrie engages a qualified quantity surveyor to get a full list of all
depreciating assets that she can claim each year until the end of
their effective lives.

Kerrie is entitled to claim deductions for decline in value of the
depreciating assets because no one has lived in it before she
purchased it.




Example: claiming the decline in value of
depreciating assets
Kate purchased a residential investment apartment from a
developer 4 months after completion. It was already tenanted
when Kate purchased it. The developer wasn’t entitled to claim a
deduction for the decline in value of the depreciating assets at
the property because they were his trading stock.

The property included depreciating assets such as curtains and
furniture installed before settlement and the transfer of title to
Kate.

Kate engages a qualified quantity surveyor to get a full list of all
depreciating assets that she can claim each year until the end of
their effective lives.

Kate is entitled to claim a deduction for decline in value of the
depreciating assets (although they have been used by the
tenants) because both of the following apply:

   no one could claim any deductions for decline in value of the
   depreciating assets

   the property was supplied to Kate within 6 months of being
   built.

If Kate had entered into the contract to buy this apartment after
6 months of it being newly built, she wouldn’t have been entitled
  to claim a deduction for the decline in value of any of the
  depreciating assets that were already in it at that time.




Calculating deductions for decline in value
To work out your deduction for decline in value, use either the:

  diminishing value method – the decline in value each year is a
  constant portion of the remaining value – claiming higher
  deductions in the early years of its effective life

  prime cost method – the decline in value each year is a uniform
  amount of the original value over its effective life – claiming a lower
  but more constant portion each year.

Depreciating assets valued at less than $1,000 can be grouped in a
low-value asset pool and depreciated together.




  Example: calculating deductions for decline in
  value
  Laura purchased a new outdoor table for her rental property on
  1 July 2025, for $1,500. It has an effective life of 5 years. She can
  choose to use either the diminishing value or prime cost method.

  Diminishing value method
  The formula for the annual decline in value using the diminishing
  value method is:

       Asset's cost × (days held ÷ 365) × (200% ÷ asset's effective
       life)

  The decline in value for 2025–26 is $600, worked out as follows:

       1,500 × (365 ÷ 365) × (200% ÷ 5)

  Laura is entitled to a deduction for decline in value of $600.

  The adjustable value of the asset on 30 June 2026 is $900. This
  is the cost of the asset ($1,500) less its decline in value up to
  30 June 2026 ($600).

  Prime cost method
   The formula for the annual decline in value using the prime cost
   method is:

       Asset's cost × (days held ÷ 365) × (100% ÷ asset's effective
       life)

   The decline in value for 2025–26 is $300, worked out as follows:

       $1,500 × (365 ÷ 365) × (100% ÷ 5)

   Laura is entitled to a deduction for decline in value of $300.

   The adjustable value of the asset on 30 June 2026 is $1,200.
   This is the cost of the asset ($1,500) less its decline in value up
   to 30 June 2026 ($300).


For help to help work out the deduction you can claim from a
depreciating asset, see Depreciation and capital allowances tool.




   Second-hand depreciating assets
   In most cases you can't claim a deduction for second-hand
   depreciating assets after 1 July 2017.




QC 103906



Second-hand depreciating assets
In most cases you can't claim a deduction for second-hand
depreciating assets after 1 July 2017.

Last updated 22 June 2026



Second-hand depreciating assets you
can't claim
Second-hand depreciating assets are depreciating assets that were
already installed ready for use or used:

   by another entity (except as trading stock)
  in your private residence

  for a non-taxable purpose, unless that use was occasional (for
  example, staying at the property for one evening while carrying out
  maintenance activities would be occasional use).

Second-hand depreciating assets for residential rental properties are
generally things that were in a property when you purchased it, or your
private residence that you later rent out.

You can’t claim a deduction for certain second-hand depreciating
assets unless you are either:

  using the property in carrying on a business (including a business of
  letting rental properties)

  one of the following

     corporate tax entity

     superannuation plan that is not a self-managed super fund

     public unit trust

     managed investment trust

     unit trust or a partnership, where all of the members are entities
     of a type listed above.

Otherwise, you can only claim deductions for second-hand or used
depreciating assets in residential rental properties if both of the
following apply:

  you purchased the asset before 7:30 pm on 9 May 2017

  you installed it into your rental property before 1 July 2017.



  Example: Tim's rental property
  Sue purchased her house in 2009. In October 2025, she listed
  her house for sale. While it was advertised, she moved out and
  replaced the carpet. No one lived in the house while it was
  advertised. The house was then sold to Tim. After purchasing the
  property, Tim rented it out immediately.

  Tim can't claim a deduction for the decline in value of the
  depreciating assets in the property because they were all
  previously used. He also can't claim a deduction for the decline in
  value for the carpet because he didn't own the asset when it was
  first installed ready for use.




  Example: asset used privately
  Eliza purchased a dishwasher in April 2017 and used it for private
  purposes at home (her main residence). In July 2019, she
  installed this dishwasher in her residential rental property. Eliza
  can't claim deductions for the dishwasher's decline in value
  because:

     she had previously used it privately, and

     she installed it in her rental property after 30 June 2017.



Home turned into a residential rental property
If you turn your home into a residential rental property on or after
1 July 2017, you can't claim a deduction for the decline in value for
depreciating assets that were in your home. You can only claim a
deduction for the decline in value for any new depreciating assets that
you purchase for your residential rental property.



  Example: changing main residence as a residential
  property
  At the start of 2016, Kendrick purchased a home as his main
  residence. In August 2017, Kendrick moved out and rented out
  the property fully furnished, which included the furniture and
  fittings he had been using while living there.

  As Kendrick's home was made available for rent on or after 1 July
  2017, he isn't able to claim a deduction for the decline in value for
  any remaining effective life of the used depreciating assets in it.
  Kendrick can claim a deduction for the decline in value of the
  new depreciating assets that he purchases for his rental
  property.




Exceptions – when you can claim
You can claim a deduction for the decline in value of second-hand
depreciating assets if any of the following apply:

  You are carrying on a business of letting rental properties.

  You purchased your residential rental property or a second-hand
  depreciating asset for your residential rental property before
  7:30 pm (AEST) on 9 May 2017.

  You used a depreciating asset that you acquired before 7:30 pm
  (AEST) on 9 May 2017 and then, before 1 July 2017, you installed it
  at your residential rental property.

  Your rental property is not used to provide residential
  accommodation; for example, it is let out for commercial purposes
  (such as a doctor's surgery).

  The entity that owns the residential rental property is an excluded
  entity.

  The income generating activities at your rental property are
  unrelated to providing residential accommodation (for example,
  solar panels used in generating income from the sale of electricity).



  Example: claiming the decline in value of
  second-hand assets
  Sharon has been renting out her residential property since
  September 2015. In March 2017, she purchased a second-hand
  fridge to replace the fridge that had broken down.

  Because Sharon purchased the second-hand fridge for her rental
  property before 7:30 pm on 9 May 2017, she can claim a
  deduction for the decline in value for any remaining effective life
  of the asset.
  Example: second-hand depreciating asset
  Don purchased a second-hand clothes dryer and installed it in
  his residential rental property on 8 May 2017.

  Assuming the dryer had 5 years of remaining effective life, Don
  can claim deductions for its decline in value for 5 years because
  he had purchased and installed the dryer before 9 May 2017.




Home turned into a rental property before
1 July 2017
If you turned your home into a residential rental property, you can only
claim a deduction for the decline in value of assets in it if both of the
following apply:

  You purchased your home before 7:30 pm on 9 May 2017.

  You turned your home into a residential rental property before 1 July
  2017.




  Example: assets bought after 9 May 2017
  At the start of 2016, Marty purchased a home as his main
  residence.

  In June 2017, Marty moved out and rented out the property fully
  furnished, which included the furniture and fittings he had been
  using while living there.

  As Marty rented out his home before 1 July 2017, and he
  purchased it before 7:30 pm on 9 May 2017, he can claim a
  deduction for the decline in value for any remaining effective life
  of the used depreciating assets in it.

  However, from the 2017–18 income year, Marty can’t claim a
  deduction for the decline in value of any second-hand
  depreciating asset that he purchases and installs after 7:30 pm
  on 9 May 2017.
   If Marty:

      Moved out in June 2017 and the property was vacant until he
      made it available for rent in July 2017, he couldn’t claim a
      deduction for the decline in value for any remaining effective
      life of the used depreciating assets in it.

      Purchased a new asset for the rental property after he moved
      out, he can claim a deduction for its decline in value, as the
      asset wasn’t previously used.


For more information on depreciation, including a list of rental property
items that can be depreciated, see the Rental properties guide or the
Guide to depreciating assets.




QC 103908



Repair and maintenance expenses
Find out how and when to claim your repair and
maintenance expenses.

Last updated 22 May 2026




What you can claim
Repair and maintenance expenses are costs you incur to:

   keep your property in a tenantable condition

   fix wear and tear or damage that occurs while renting out your
   property.

To be a deductible expense, the property must either continue to be:

   rented on an ongoing basis

   held to produce assessable income, that is, it must remain available
   for rent on commercial terms, even if there is a short period where
   the property is unoccupied – for example, unseasonable weather
   causes cancellations.
If your rental property is also your holiday home, you can't claim a
deduction for repair and maintenance expenses, or any other
ownership or use expenses, unless you use the property, (or hold it for
use) mainly to produce rental income. For more information about
holiday homes and what expenses you can claim, see Holiday homes.

If you do your own repairs or maintenance work, you can’t claim a
deduction for the value of your contribution to the work, that is, your
labour. However, you can claim a deduction for the cost of any
materials you buy to carry out the repair or maintenance work.

For more information, see TR 97/25 Income tax: property development:
deduction for capital expenditure on construction of income producing
capital works, including buildings and structural improvements.

Some repairs are considered capital in nature and must be claimed
over several years. This may include:

  initial repairs for defects that existed at the date you acquired the
  property

  improvements, which are capital works

  replacement of entire units of property, including depreciating
  assets.




  Example: doing your own repairs or
  maintenance
  Sanjay owns a rental and his tenants have just moved out. Due to
  wear and tear on the property by his former tenants, he needs to
  repaint a few walls before getting new tenants in.

  Sanjay decides to repaint the walls himself over a weekend.

  Sanjay can claim a deduction for the cost of the materials to
  prepare and paint the walls. He can’t claim a deduction for what
  he considers to be the value of his own labour.
  Example: replacement of an entirety
  Robin has owned his rental property for 10 years when a toilet is
  damaged. The entire toilet needs to be replaced.

  The toilet is a fixture but also an entirety because:

     it is identifiable as a separate item of capital equipment

     it provides a useful function independent of the rest of the
     premises.

  Replacing an entirety is not a repair. The cost of installing the
  new toilet is claimed as a capital works deduction.




Repairs
Repairs are done to remedy defects in, damage to or deterioration of
the property. Repairs must relate directly to wear and tear or other
damage that occurred while you were renting out the property.

Any repairs for remedying damage that existed when you acquired the
property are initial repairs and are capital in nature.

Examples of repairs you can claim immediately include:

  replacing a cracked pane of glass in a window

  replacing part of the gutter

  fixing or replacing part of a fence

  repairing electrical appliances or machinery.

If you no longer rent the property, you may still be able to claim repair
expenses where both:

  the need for repairs related to a period when the property was
  income producing

  the property was income producing during the income year you
  incurred the expenses.


Repairs versus improvements
If you make repairs and improvements to your property simultaneously,
you can only claim a deduction for the cost of repairs if you can
separate the cost of the repairs from the cost of the improvements.

An improvement is anything that makes part of the property better,
more valuable, more desirable or changes the character of the item
that is being worked on (for example, a renovation).

If you hire a builder or other professionals to carry out these works, we
recommend you ask for an itemised invoice to help work out your
claim.



  Example: apportioning expenses between
  repairs and improvements
  Caitlin modernised her rental property by hiring tradespeople to
  render and paint the external walls.

  She also asked the painter to paint the internal walls, which had
  deteriorated during the time she rented out the property.

  As Caitlin requested an itemised invoice from the painter, she
  could separate the cost of the internal and external painting, and
  rendering. Because of this, she could claim a deduction for the
  cost:

     of painting the internal walls as a repair

     of rendering and painting the external walls as a capital works
     deduction.




Maintenance
Maintenance means work to prevent deterioration or fix existing
deterioration. Maintenance generally involves keeping your property in
a tenantable condition.

Examples of maintenance include:

  repainting faded or damaged walls

  oiling, brushing or cleaning something that is otherwise in good
  working condition – for example, oiling a deck or cleaning a
  swimming pool
  maintaining plumbing.

You can claim a deduction for maintenance expenses in the income
year you incur them.


Initial repairs
Initial repairs to rectify damage, defects or deterioration that existed at
the time of purchasing a property can't be claimed as an immediate
deduction. It doesn’t matter if you were unaware of the need to make
repairs to the property at the time you purchased it.

Initial repairs to property such as a fence or building can generally be
claimed as a capital works deduction over 40 years. Initial repairs to
depreciating assets can't be claimed as a deduction, however the
decline in value of new replacement assets is generally deductible as
capital allowances.

The cost of initial repairs forms part of the capital gains tax (CGT) cost
base when you sell the property. You must reduce the CGT cost base
by amounts claimed (or that you were entitled to claim) as capital
works for the initial repairs.



  Example: initial repairs not deductible (existing
  damage)
  Lisa buys a property with the intention of renting it out. At the
  time of purchase Lisa knew that she would need to repair the
  roof (replace all roof tiles) and part of the ceiling as they were in
  a poor condition.

  When carrying out the works, Lisa discovered there was extra
  structural damage that required her immediate attention. The
  repair to the ceiling cost her $2,000, the replacement of roof tiles
  cost her $9,000 and the structural work cost her a total of
  $15,000.

  The 'initial' repair of the ceiling of $2,000 isn't deductible, but as
  with the replacement of the entire roof and the structural work, it
  can be claimed as a capital works deduction.

  When the property is sold, Lisa can include the $26,000 for the
  work to rectify the existing damage in her CGT cost base,
   reduced by the amount of the capital works deductions she has
   already claimed (or was entitled to claim).


For more information about how CGT applies to rental properties, see
our Guide to capital gains tax.

For a summary of the difference between repairs, maintenance and
capital expenses, go to the ATO Publication Ordering Service to
download Rental repairs, maintenance and capital expense
(NAT 75208, PDF 242KB) .




   Work out the category of your rental
   upkeep expenses
   Use our quick reference guide to categorise and claim rental
   repairs, maintenance and capital works.




QC 103907



Work out the category of your
rental upkeep expenses
Use our quick reference guide to categorise and claim
rental repairs, maintenance and capital works.

Last updated 22 May 2026

It's important to correctly categorise upkeep expenses for your rental
property to ensure they are treated correctly for tax purposes. Our
quick reference guide in the table below will help you to work out
which category your expense relates to.

If your property is your holiday home, you can't claim deductions for
repairs and maintenances unless the property is used (or held for use)
mainly to produce rental income.
Table: working out the category of your rental property
expense

   Situation      Category         Example           Claim at


 Replacing       Repair           Replacing        Repairs and
 something                        part of a        maintenance
 that is worn                     fence
 out,                             damaged in
 damaged or                       a storm
 broken while
 renting out                      Hiring a
 the property                     plumber to
                                  fix a leaking
                                  tap

 Preventing      Maintenance      Repainting       Repairs and
 or fixing                        faded            maintenance
 deterioration                    interior walls
 of an item
 that                             Re-oiling a
 occurred                         deck
 while renting
 out the
 property

 Repairing       Initial repair   Fixing           Capital
 damage that                      floorboards      works
 existed when                     or repairing
 the property                     deteriorated     This is an
 was bought                       window           initial repair
 (whether it                      frames           and the
 was known                        where the        construction
 at the time                      damage           expenditure
 of purchase                      existed          is written off
 or not)                          when the         at 2.5% over
                                  property         40 years.
                                  was bought       This doesn't
                                                   include initial
                                                   repairs to
                                                   depreciating
                                                   assets in the
                                                   property, for
                                                   which no
                                                   deduction
                                                   can be
                                                   claimed.
  Replacing an        Capital          Replacing an       Capital
  entire              works            entire fence       works
  structure

  Renovating          Capital          Adding a           Capital
  or adding a         works            carport            works
  new
  structure to
  the property

  Installing a        Depreciating     Buying a           Capital
  brand-new           asset            new                allowances
  appliance or                         dishwasher
  window
  covering                             Installing
                                       new blinds




QC 103912



Capital expenses
What to do with your capital expenses, including capital
works, improvements, and substantial renovations.

Last updated 21 May 2026



What are capital expenses
Capital expenses are expenses that provide long-term benefits to your
property. These costs typically improve the property's value or extend
its useful life. For example, installing a new roof, upgrading appliances,
or adding a deck are capital expenses. They differ from regular
operating expenses, like repairs and maintenance, which are typically
short-term and recurring.

Capital expenses includes capital works and depreciating assets.
These expenses are claimed over several years, rather than being
deducted in the year they are incurred.

For a summary of the difference between repairs, maintenance and
capital expenses, go to the ATO Publication Ordering Service to
download Rental repairs, maintenance and capital expenditure
(NAT 75208, PDF 242KB) .


Capital works
Capital works includes expenses for building the property as well as
structural improvements, alterations and extensions to the property.
The rate of deduction for these capital works is generally 2.5% or 4%
per year, spread over a period of 40 or 25 years respectively. Capital
works deductions can't exceed your construction expenses.

You can only claim a deduction for the capital works on rental
properties once construction has been fully completed, if the property:

  was built after 17 July 1985

  is rented or held to produce assessable income, that is, it must be
  available for rent on commercial terms .

An asset that is fixed to, or otherwise part of, a building or structural
improvement, will generally be a construction expense and can only be
claimed as capital works.

Preliminary expenses such as architect fees, engineering fees,
surveying fees, foundation excavation expenses and costs of building
permits also form part of construction expenses.

Examples of capital works expenses include:

  building and construction costs

  alterations to a building

  major renovations to a room

  substantial renovations to a property

  adding a fence

  building extensions such as garages and patios

  adding structural improvements such as a driveway or retaining
  wall.
Example: completion of capital works before
claiming a deduction
Jin decides to add a carport to his rental property. He organises
a company to supply and install it and pays a deposit of $1,000
on 24 June 2024. The carport is completed on 1 July 2025 (the
following income year) and he pays the remainder $2,500.

Jin can start claiming a capital works deduction of $87.50
($3,500 x 2.5%) in the income year the work was completed. The
capital works deduction will be spread over a period of 40 years,
at 2.5% per year.




Example: replacing assets in a residential
property
Janet has owned and rented out a residential property since
12 January 1986. In 2025, she replaced the old kitchen fixtures,
including the cupboards and appliances. The old cupboards had
deteriorated through water damage and wear and tear.

The kitchen cupboards are separately identifiable capital items
with their own function. This means the cost of completely
replacing them is a capital cost. Because of this, Janet can claim:

  capital works deductions for the construction cost of this work

  deductions for the decline in value of the new kitchen
  appliances (none of these appliances were previously used).

This is the case regardless of whether:

  new fittings are of a similar size, design and quality as the
  originals

  new cupboards are made from a modern equivalent of the
  material used in the originals

  layout and design of the new kitchen may be substantially the
  same as the original.
Improvements
An improvement is anything that makes part of the property better,
more valuable, more desirable or changes the character of the item
that is being worked on.

Capital improvements (such as remodelling a bathroom or adding a
pergola) should be claimed as capital works deductions.

Improvements include work that:

  provides something new

  furthers the income-producing ability or expected life of the
  property

  goes beyond just restoring the efficient functioning of the property.

Improvements can be either capital works where it is a structural
improvement or capital allowances where the item is a depreciating
asset.




  Example: property improvements
  Tim replaced a fibre cement sheeting wall inside his property
  because it was damaged by tenants. He replaced the old wall
  with a brick feature wall.

  The new wall is an improvement because Tim did more than just
  restore the efficient function of the wall. This means Tim can't
  claim the cost of the new wall as a repair, but he can claim it as
  capital works deductions.

  If Tim replaced the fibro with a current equivalent, such as
  plasterboard, he could have claimed his costs as a repair. This is
  because it would have restored the efficient function of the wall
  without changing its character, even though a different material
  was used.




Substantial renovations
Substantial renovations of a rental property are where all or
substantially all, of a building is removed or is replaced. This could
include the removal or replacement of foundations, external walls,
interior supporting walls, floors, roof or staircases.

For renovations to be substantial, they must directly affect most rooms
in a building.

Renovations you make to a house are considered collectively, such as
the:

  removal and replacement of the exterior walls

  removal of some internal walls

  replacement of the flooring

  replacement of the kitchen.

If the renovations are substantial, the property is treated as new
residential premises.

Apart from the cost of replacing depreciating assets, the cost of all
renovations are deductible as capital works.

The cost of replacing depreciating assets as part of substantial
renovations, can be claimed as a decline in value deduction, provided
the asset has been acquired as a new asset for the purpose of gaining
income from rental income.



  Example: claiming the cost of renovations
  Jake bought a 4 bedroom residential property in October 2025
  as a rental property. As Jake was keen to get tenants as soon as
  he took possession of the property, he engaged a real estate
  agent when the contract became unconditional. The real estate
  agent advised him of the maximum rent he could charge and
  started to advertise the property as being available to rent from
  one day after settlement.

  Three months before selling, the previous owners removed a wall
  between 2 bedrooms and turned the space into a large bedroom
  with an ensuite. They also repainted and recarpeted the room.

  Even though Jake acquired the property within 6 months of the
  renovations being completed, the renovations only affected a
  part of the house, and aren't classified as being substantial
  renovations.
   The previous owners provide Jake with the renovation
   construction costs.

   The cost of the renovations, excluding the new carpet and any
   other depreciating assets replaced, can be claimed as a capital
   works deduction by Jake.

   As the new carpet and other depreciating assets are not
   acquired as new assets by Jake, he can't claim a deduction for
   their decline in value.

   However, if Jake buys any brand-new depreciating assets for the
   property, he will be able to claim a deduction for their decline in
   value.




   Work out your capital works deductions
   You can claim capital works deductions for certain construction
   costs for your rental property.




QC 103909



Work out your capital works
deductions
You can claim capital works deductions for certain
construction costs for your rental property.

Last updated 22 June 2026



Limits to claiming capital works
deductions
You can only claim a deduction for those periods during the year you
used your rental property for income-producing purposes. You can't
claim for the period you use the property for personal purposes.
 Example: how to work out capital works
 deductions from the date construction starts
 On 1 March 2026, Meg purchased a rental property for $700,000
 and immediately rented it out. Meg obtained a report from a
 quantity surveyor stating:

 Construction of the property started in February 2005.

 The property is a residential townhouse.

 Construction was completed in November 2005.

 The townhouse was built by a developer.

 The estimated cost of constructing the townhouse was
 $500,000.

 Meg claims a capital works deduction in her 2026 tax return for
 her rental property based on the estimate of the construction
 costs she gets from the quantity surveyor. However, she only
 claims a deduction for that part of the year her property was
 used for an income producing purpose (1 March 2026 to 30 June
 2026). The rate of deduction she claims was 2.5% as
 construction of her residential property started after
 15 September 1987.

 Her annual capital works deduction was calculated as follows:

     $500,000 × 2.5% (see note) = $12,500

 Note: See the date construction started for different rates of
 reduction.

 As the property was only used for income producing purposes
 for 122 days in 2026, her 2025–26 claim was calculated as
 follows:

     $12,500 × (122 ÷ 365) = $4,178




What you need to know to work out your
claim
As a general rule, you can claim a capital works deduction for the cost
of construction for 40 years from the date the construction was
completed. However, to make sure that you are eligible, you must have
all of the following:

  details of the type of construction

  the date construction commenced

  the date construction was completed

  the construction cost (not the purchase price)

  details of who carried out the construction work

  details of the period during the year that the property was used for
  income producing purposes.

Capital works expenses you incur form part of the cost base of your
property for capital gains tax purposes. If you claim a capital works
deduction, you will need to take this into account when you work out
your capital gain or loss.

If it isn't possible to determine the actual construction costs, you can
obtain an estimate from a quantity surveyor or other independent
qualified person. You can claim a deduction for the fees you pay to
obtain this estimate.

For information about how capital works deductions affect the CGT
cost base, see Cost base adjustments for capital works.

Types of construction and the date construction
commenced
To be eligible to claim a capital works deduction, construction work
must start after the date relevant to that type of construction in the
table below.

The amount you can claim for construction expenses depends on the
type of construction and the date you start construction. Your capital
works deductions can't exceed the construction expenses. This table
shows the rate of deduction and the period over which you can claim
the deduction depending on the type of construction.


Table: Capital works deductions for buildings and
structural improvements
                        Construction     Applicable years
Type of
                        commenced        and deduction
construction
                        after            rate per year


You intend to use the   21 August 1979   22 August 1979 to
building on                              21 August 1984 –
completion to provide                    2.5%
short-term
accommodation to                         22 August 1984 to
travellers in:                           15 September
                                         1987 – 4%
  apartment
  buildings in which                     16 September
  you own or lease                       1987 to
  at least                               26 February 1992
  10 apartments                          – 2.5% (where the
  units or flats                         construction
                                         related to certain
  hotels                                 pre-16 September
                                         1987 contracts,
  motels                                 the rate is 4%)
  guest houses with
  at least                               27 February 1992
  10 bedrooms.                           onwards – 4%


Building intended to    19 July 1982     20 July 1982 to
be used on                               21 August 1984 –
completion for non-                      2.5%
residential purposes
such as a shop or                        22 August 1984 to
office.                                  15 September
                                         1987 – 4%

                                         16 September
                                         1987 onwards –
                                         2.5%

Any building intended   17 July 1985     18 July 1985 to
to be used on                            15 September
completion for                           1987 – 4%
residential purposes
or to produce income.                    16 September
                                         1987 onwards –
                                         2.5% (where the
                                         construction
                                         related to certain
                                         pre-16 September
                                                 1987 contracts,
                                                 the rate is 4%)

  Structural                26 February          27 February 1992
  improvements              1992                 onwards – 2.5%
  intended to be used
  on completion for
  residential purposes
  or to produce income.

  Environment               18 August 1992       18 August 1992
  protection                                     onwards – 2.5%
  earthworks intended
  to be used on
  completion for
  residential purposes
  or to produce income.

  Any capital works         30 June 1997         The capital works
  used to produce                                must actually be
  income, even if they                           used in a
  were not intended to                           deductible way in
  be used for that                               the income year in
  purpose.                                       which the
                                                 deduction is
  For pre-1 July 1997                            claimed (see
  works only, the                                above onwards
  capital works must                             rates details for
  have been intended                             each type of
  for use for specified                          construction).
  purposes at the time
  of completion.


Two point 5 per cent means that you can claim deductions for
40 years and 4% means for 25 years.

You can start claiming capital works deductions only when
construction of the relevant capital works is completed.

Although you may be able to claim capital works deductions for your
building costs, you may not be able to claim these deductions for
certain costs such as for general landscaping.


Construction cost
You must provide evidence of the construction costs by either of the
following:
  precise documents that show the construction costs such as
  receipts

  a report written by an appropriately qualified person.

The following items can't be used as the construction cost:

  the purchase price of the building and land

  the insured cost

  the replacement cost.

If you were the owner builder
If you carried out the construction as an owner builder, the value of
your contribution to the works doesn't form part of the construction
cost. This includes:

  your labour and expertise

  any notional profit element – that is, an amount you might consider
  as a profit margin on the construction cost.

Obtaining the construction information
You should make sure you keep records that detail the construction
costs whether:

  you carry out the construction

  you contract a builder to carry out the construction.

If you don't have a record of the construction costs (for example,
where the vendor didn't provide them) you will need to obtain this
information from either the previous owner or an appropriately
qualified person. This could be a:

  quantity surveyor

  clerk of works, such as a project organiser for major building
  projects

  supervising architect who approves payments at project stages

  builder with experience estimating construction costs of similar
  building projects.
You can claim a deduction for your costs of obtaining this information
from an appropriately qualified person in the income year you pay it.

Quantity surveyor reports can also include a schedule of depreciable
assets (capital allowances). You can claim a separate deduction for the
decline in value of depreciating assets in a rental property:

  if you bought the rental property before 7:30 pm (AEST) on 9 May
  2017 – it doesn't matter if the property was brand new or not

  if the depreciating asset is brand new – purchased at or after
  7:30 pm (AEST) on 9 May 2017

     as part of your brand-new property

     that you subsequently bought for your existing (non-new)
     property

  if you bought the property on or after 7:30 pm (AEST) on 9 May
  2017 to provide residential accommodation, the property has to be
  brand new or substantially renovated if no one previously claimed
  any depreciation deductions on the asset, and either

     no one lived in the property when you acquired it, or

     if anyone lived in the property after it was built or renovated, you
     acquired it within 6 months of the property being built or
     renovated

  the property doesn't provide residential accommodation, or

  the asset is used in carrying on a business, or

  the entity claiming depreciation is a

     corporate tax entity

     superannuation plan other than a self-managed superannuation
     fund

     public unit trust

     managed investment trust

     unit trust or partnership whose members are any of the entities
     in this list.

You should provide the buyer with a capital works notice containing
information to allow them to work out their capital works deduction if
you both:
   are a vendor disposing of capital works begun after 26 February
   1992

   were able to claim a deduction for those capital works.

The notice should be provided within 6 months following the income
year that you dispose of the property or a further period allowed by us.

Where you don't use the property to gain rental income, the vendor
disposing of the property doesn't need to provide the purchaser with a
notice. In this situation, the purchaser can obtain an estimate, usually
from an appropriately qualified person.

Remember to obtain your construction costs report as soon as
possible, as these reports can take a long time to prepare. If you
obtain a report after you lodge your tax return, you can amend your tax
return by a certain later date. There is a time limit on amending tax
returns where we have already issued a notice of assessment.




QC 21620



Borrowing expenses
Find out which borrowing expenses you can claim, and
how to claim them.

Last updated 22 May 2026



About borrowing expenses
Borrowing expenses are the expenses you incur to take out a loan to
buy property.

You must claim a deduction for all eligible borrowing expenses for
5 years or spread it over the term of the loan, whichever is shorter.

If the total deductible borrowing expenses are $100 or less, they are
fully deductible in the income year you incur them.

If you have refinanced or redrawn on your loan, see Interest expenses.

If your rental property is also your holiday home, borrowing expenses
will be an ownership expense, you can only claim a deduction for
ownership and use expenses if you used the property (or held it for
use) mainly to produce rental income. For more information about what
expenses you can and can't claim for a holiday home, see Holiday
homes.

For a summary of this information in poster format, go to the ATO
Publication Ordering Service to download Rental borrowing expenses
(NAT 75210, PDF 210KB) .


Borrowing expenses you can claim
You can claim a deduction for the following as borrowing expenses:

  loan establishment fees

  lender's mortgage insurance (insurance taken out by the lender and
  billed to you)

  title search fees your lender charges

  costs for preparing and filing mortgage documents (including
  solicitors' fees)

  mortgage broker fees

  fees for a valuation required for loan approval

  stamp duty you pay on the mortgage.


Borrowing expenses you can't claim
You can't claim any of the following as borrowing expenses:

  the amount you borrow for the property

  loan balances for the property

  interest expenses (as these are claimed separately)

  repayments of principal against the loan balance

  stamp duty charged by your state or territory government on the
  transfer (purchase) of the property title (as this is a capital expense)

  legal expenses including solicitors' and conveyancers' fees for the
  purchase of the property (as this is a capital expense)
  stamp duty you incur to acquire a leasehold interest in property
  such as an Australian Capital Territory 99-year crown lease (but you
  may be able to claim this as a lease document expense)

  insurance premiums where, under the policy, your loan will be paid
  out in the event that you die, become disabled or unemployed (as
  this is a private expense)

  borrowing expenses on any portion of the loan you use for private
  purposes (for example, money you use to buy a car).

You may be able to include capital expenses in the 'cost base' of your
property. This can help you reduce the amount of capital gains tax
(CGT) you pay when you sell your property. The expenses you incur
when purchasing and selling your rental property are capital expenses.




  Example: calculating borrowing expenses over
  5 years
  On 3 July, Peter took out a 25-year loan of $300,000 to purchase
  a rental property. Peter's deductible borrowing expenses were:

     $800 stamp duty on the mortgage

     $500 loan establishment fees

     $300 valuation fee required by the bank for the loan.

  Peter also paid $12,000 in stamp duty on the transfer of the
  property title. He can't claim a deduction for this expense but it
  will form part of the cost base of the property for CGT purposes
  when he sells the property.

  As Peter's borrowing expenses are $1,600, which is more than
  $100, he must claim them over 5 years from the date he took out
  his loan for the property. He works out his borrowing expense
  deduction as follows:

     For the first year, Peter performs the following steps

        Step 1: work out the number of days from 3 July to 30 June
        (363)

        Step 2: work out the number of days in the 5-year period
        from 3 July in Year 1 to 2 July in Year 6(1,826)
     Step 3: divide the number of days in Step 1 by the number
     of days in Step 2 (363 ÷ 1,826)

     Step 4: multiply Step 3 result by the total borrowing
     expenses of $1,600 (363 ÷ 1826) × $1,600 = $318.07). He
     claims $318.07 as a deduction in his tax return.

   For Years 2 to 5, Peter performs the following steps

     Step 1: works out the remaining borrowing expenses, by
     reducing the original borrowing expenses of $1,600 by
     deductions already claimed in previous years

     Step 2: works out the number of days in the income year
     (Year 4 is a leap year)

     Step 3: works out the number of days remaining in the
     5 years (this includes the number of days in the income
     year for which he is preparing the tax return)

     Step 4: divides Step 2 result by Step 3 result

     Step 5: multiplies Step 4 result by Step 1 result (equals the
     amount he claims as a deduction in his tax return).

   By the end of the Year 5, Peter has claimed deductions
   totalling $1,598.25 on his respective tax returns.

   In the final year, Peter performs the following steps

     Step 1: works out the remaining borrowing expenses, which
     equals $1.75 ($1,600 minus $1,598.25)

     Step 2: works out the number of days between 1 July and
     2 July (equals 2)

     Step 3: works out the number of days remaining in the
     5 years (1,826 − 1,824 = 2)

     Step 4: divides Step 2 result by Step 3 result (equals one)

     Step 5: multiplies Step 4 result by Step 1 result (equals
     $1.75). Thus, Peter claims a deduction of $1.75 in his Year 6
     tax return.




How to calculate borrowing expenses
Generally, borrowing expenses are claimed over the first 5 years of
owning your rental property.

If you got the loan part way through the income year, you need to
adjust your claim according to the number of days in the year you had
the loan.

You can claim a deduction for the balance of the borrowing expenses
in the final year of repayment if you either:

  repay sooner than the term of the loan

  repay your loan in less than 5 years.

You can use our Deductible borrowing expenses calculator
(xlsx, 178KB)   to work out your claim.




  Example: work out borrowing expenses for the
  maximum 5-year period
  Fiona and Max (as joint tenants each with 50% interest) secure a
  20-year loan of $209,000 to buy:

     a rental property for $170,000

     a car for private use for $39,000.

  They pay for establishment fees, valuation fees and stamp duty
  on the mortgage. Their borrowing expenses on the loan total
  $1,670.

  As their borrowing expenses are more than $100, they must
  apportion their deduction over 5 years because it's less than the
  period of the loan (20 years).

  As they use part of the loan ($39,000) for a private purpose, they
  can't claim a deduction for borrowing expenses on this portion of
  the loan.

  Fiona and Max secure the loan on 17 July. They work out the
  borrowing expense deduction for the first year as follows:

       Borrowing expenses × (number of relevant days in income
       year ÷ number of days in the 5-year period) × (amount of
       rental property loan ÷ total amount borrowed) = deduction
       for the year.
  As joint tenants, they need to report their share (50%) in each of
  their tax returns.

  They work out their borrowing expenses deduction for each
  income year as shown in the table below. Year 4 is a leap year.
  Borrowing expense calculation


  Borrowing expense calculation

                                                         Available
                                                         deduction
    Year                  Calculation
                                                          for the
                                                           year


    1          $1,670.00 × (349 ÷ 1,826) = $319.18          $259.62
                  $319.18 × ($170,000 ÷ $209,000)

    2         $1,350.82 × (365 ÷ 1,477) = $333.82           $271.53
                 $333.82 × ($170,000 ÷ $209,000)

    3          $1,017.00 × (365 ÷ 1,112) = $333.82          $271.53
                $333.82 × ($170,000 ÷ $209,000)

    4             $683.18 × (366 ÷ 747) = $334.73           $272.27
    (leap        $334.73 × ($170,000 ÷ $209,000)
    year)

    5             $348.45 × (365 ÷ 381) = 333.82            $271.53
                 $333.82 × ($170,000 ÷ $209,000)

    6                  $14.63 × (16 ÷ 16) = $14.63           $11.90
                  $14.63 × ($170,000 ÷ $209,000)




QC 103910



Interest expenses
Find out which interest expenses you can claim and what
to do if your loan account is used for private purposes.

Last updated 21 May 2026



About interest expenses
When you take out a loan for a rental property, you need to pay
interest on the amount you borrow from your bank or lender. We refer
to these as interest expenses. The principal amount is the money you
borrow from your bank or lender.

If you use the principal amount to buy a rental property and it is rented
or held to produce assessable income, for the entire income year, you
can claim a deduction for the interest charged on the loan.

You can only claim a portion of your interest expenses as a deduction
if you either:

   use a portion of the principal amount to buy your rental property

   the property is rented or held to produce assessable income for
   rent for part of the income year.

If your rental property is also your holiday home, you can't claim a
deduction for interest expenses, or any other ownership or use
expenses, unless you used the property (or held it for use), mainly to
produce rental income. For more information about holiday homes and
what expenses you can claim, see Holiday homes.

You can't claim a deduction for additional payments made to reduce
the principal amount of the loan.


Claiming interest expenses
For a summary fact sheet of what you can and can't claim, go to the
ATO Publication Ordering Service to download Rental interest
expenses (NAT 75207, PDF 215KB) .


Interest expenses you can claim
You can claim the interest expenses on the loan principal (mortgage)
you use to:
  buy a rental property

  buy a depreciating asset for the rental property – for example, an air
  conditioner for the rental property

  pay for deductible expenses – for example, to make repairs to the
  property that arise as a result of you renting it out

  finance renovations and extensions to the rental property.

You can also claim interest expenses when:

  you have pre-paid interest expenses up to 12 months in advance

  during the period you're repairing damage to your rental property,
  making it uninhabitable while the repairs are taking place.




  Example: joint borrowers, joint owners –
  claiming share of interest incurred
  Kosta and Jenny take out an investment loan for $350,000 to
  purchase an apartment they hold as joint tenants.

  They rent out the property for the whole year from 1 July. They
  incur interest of $30,000 for the year.

  Kosta and Jenny can each make an interest claim of $15,000 in
  their respective tax returns for the first year of owning the
  property.




  Example: joint borrowers, sole owner – claiming
  all interest incurred
  Simone decides to purchase a rental property. When she
  approaches her bank for a loan, they require her husband Jarrod
  to be a co-borrower, even though the rental property will be
  solely in Simone’s name.

  When Simone and Jarrod enter into the loan agreement with the
  bank, they also enter into a separate legally enforceable written
  agreement with each other. The agreement is witnessed by a
  justice of the peace and states that Simone, as the sole owner of
  the rental property, is 100% liable for the loan repayments and
  interest.

  As the sole owner of the property, Simone must declare 100% of
  the rental income in her tax return.

  Simone can also claim a deduction for 100% of the interest
  expenses. Simone's agreement with Jarrod shows her intention
  to be liable for all of the loan repayments and interest charged on
  the joint loan. Simone's bank statements also support her
  intention as they show that she paid all the repayments and
  interest expenses from her own bank account.




Interest expenses you can't claim
You can't claim a deduction for interest expenses:

  for any period the property is used for private purposes, even if it's
  a short period of time

  on the portion of the loan used for private purposes (for example, to
  purchase a car), either when

     you took out the loan

     you refinance the loan

  on a loan you used to buy a new home if you don't use the new
  home to produce income, even if you use your rental property as
  security for the loan

  on a loan to purchase your holiday home unless you use the
  property (or hold it for use), mainly to produce rental income.




  Example: claiming part of the interest incurred
  Yoko takes out a loan of $400,000 and uses the loan to:

     buy a rental property for $380,000

     buy a new car for $20,000 for private use.

  Yoko rents her property for the whole year from 1 July. Her total
  interest expense on the $400,000 loan is $35,000.
  Yoko works out how much interest she can claim as a deduction,
  using the following calculation:

       Total interest expenses × (rental property loan ÷ total
       borrowings) = deductible interest

       $35,000 × ($380,000 ÷ $400,000) = $33,250

  Yoko can claim an interest expense deduction of $33,250.

  The ratio between the deductible and private components of the
  loan is 95% and 5%. Yoko must continue to apportion interest in
  accordance with this ratio for the life of the loan. Similarly, any
  repayments of principal are applied in the same ratio.




Loan accounts used for private and rental
expenses
If you have a loan account used for both private purposes and rental
property expenses, you must keep accurate records to enable you to
calculate the interest that applies to the rental property portion of the
loan.

You must separate the interest relating to the rental property from any
interest on funds used for private purposes.

You can't only repay the portion of the loan for your private purchases.
All loan repayments must be apportioned across both rental and
private portions of the loan for the length of the loan.

For apportionment calculations in these situations, see paragraphs
19 and 20 of TR 2000/2 Income tax: deductibility of interest on
moneys drawn down under line of credit facilities and redraw facilities.



  Example: interest incurred on a mortgage for a
  new home
  Zac and Lucy take out a $400,000 loan secured against their
  existing home to purchase a new home.

  Rather than sell their existing home, they decide to rent it out.
They have a mortgage of $25,000 remaining on their existing
home which is added to the $400,000 loan under a loan facility
with sub-accounts – that is, the 2 loans are managed separately
but are secured by the one property.

Zac and Lucy can claim a deduction for the interest charged on
the $25,000 loan for their original home, as it is now rented out.

They can't claim a deduction for the interest charged on the
$400,000 loan used to purchase their new home. Even though
the loan is secured against their rental property, the new home
isn’t being used to produce income.




Example: interest incurred on funds redrawn
from the loan halfway through the year
Tyler has an investment loan for his rental property with a redraw
facility. He is ahead on his repayments by $9,500 which he can
redraw. Halfway through the year, Tyler redraws the available
amount of $9,500 and buys himself a new TV and a lounge suite.

The outstanding balance of the loan after the redraw increases
to $365,000 and total interest expenses incurred immediately
before the redraw are $9,300. The total interest on $365,000 for
the year is $19,000.

Tyler can only claim the interest expenses on the portion of the
loan relating to the rental property. He uses the following
calculations:

    Total loan balance − redraw amount = rental property loan
    portion

    $365,000 − $9,500 = $355,500

To work out how much interest he can claim, he does the
following calculation for the period following the redraw:

    Total interest expenses after the redraw × (rental property
    loan portion ÷ loan balance at the time of the
    redraw) = deductible interest
    ($19,000 − $9,300) × ($355,500 ÷ $365,000) = $9,448

Tyler can claim interest of $18,748, being $9,300 plus $9,448.

The ratio between the deductible and private components of the
loan is 97.4% and 2.6%. Tyler must continue to apportion interest
and repayments of principal in accordance with this ratio for the
life of the loan.




Example: interest incurred on deposit
Pauline has an existing home which is her main residence and
isn't rented. She wants to purchase a rental property for
$700,000. She receives pre-approval from the lender for an
investment loan amount of $630,000. Pauline redraws $140,000
from her personal home loan to pay a deposit of $140,000 to buy
the property.

When the property settles, the lender advances $630,000 to her.
She uses $560,000 to settle the purchase of the property. The
remaining $70,000 of the $630,000 is paid to reduce the amount
redrawn from her personal home loan. This amount was used to
pay the deposit, reducing the redrawn amount from $140,000 to
$70,000. She immediately begins renting the property.

Pauline can claim a deduction for the interest charged on the
entire $630,000 loan:

  She can claim a deduction for the interest on the $560,000
  component of the loan used to settle the property, as that is
  being used to purchase the rental property from which she will
  earn assessable income.

  She can claim a deduction for the interest on the $70,000
  component of the investment loan that was used to partially
  repay the drawdown. This is because the funds used to
  refinance the drawdown takes on the same character as the
  drawdown. Since interest on the original drawdown would be
  deductible, because it was used to pay the deposit for the
  rental property, interest on the $70,000 amount used to repay
  the drawdown would also be deductible.
  She can also claim a deduction for interest expenses charged on
  the remaining $70,000 of the drawdown that was used to finance
  the deposit on the rental property.




  Example: interest incurred on personal funds
  Barbara wants to purchase a rental property for $700,000. She
  obtains pre-approval for an investment loan of $630,000. She
  pays a deposit of $140,000 to purchase the property which is
  funded from a gift by her parents.

  When the property settles, the lender advances $630,000 to
  Barbara. She uses $560,000 to settle the purchase of the
  property. The remaining $70,000 is left in a savings account
  where it will be used for private purposes.

  Barbara can't claim a deduction for the whole interest expense
  charged on the total loan amount of $630,000:

     She can claim a deduction for the interest charged on the
     $560,000 component of the total loan amount which was
     used to settle the property, as that is being used to purchase
     the rental property from which she will earn assessable
     income.

     She can’t claim a deduction for the interest charged on the
     remaining $70,000 amount that is now in her savings account
     to be used for private purposes. The funds are not being used
     to refinance a loan used to pay the deposit as the amount
     provided by her parents wasn't a loan. The $70,000 in her
     savings account is being used for private purposes and isn't
     being used to earn assessable income.




Thin capitalisation
Thin capitalisation rules may affect you if the combined debt
deductions (for example, interest) of you and your associated entities
are more than $2 million in any income year and you are:
   an Australian resident and you (or any associated entities) have

      certain international dealings

      overseas interests

   a foreign resident (or associated entity) with certain investments in
   Australia.

You must consider the thin capitalisation rules each year.




QC 103911



Rental properties and travel
expenses
If you have a residential rental property, you may not be
able to claim a deduction for related travel expenses.

Last updated 22 June 2026



Deductions for travel expenses
From 1 July 2017 you can't claim any deductions for the cost of travel
you incur relating to your residential rental property unless you are
either:

   in the business of letting rental properties

   an excluded entity.

Prior to 1 July 2017:

   you could claim your travel expenses relating to your residential
   rental property, and

   you didn’t include the travel expenses in the cost base or reduced
   cost base when calculating any capital gain or capital loss when you
   sold the property.

Travel expenses include the costs you incur on car expenses, airfare,
taxi, hire car, public transport, accommodation and meals to:
   inspect, maintain or collect rent for a rental property you own or
   have an ownership interest in

   travel to any other place as long as it is associated with earning
   rental income from your existing rental property (for example,
   visiting your real estate agent to discuss your current rental
   property).

A residential premises (property) is land or a building that is:

   occupied as a residence or for residential accommodation

   intended to be occupied, and is capable of being occupied, as a
   residence or for residential accommodation.

To be residential premises, the premises must be fit for human
habitation.

For example, a house or a unit used as residential accommodation to
produce rental income is residential rental property.

A caravan or a houseboat is generally not residential rental property.




   Example: individual with residential rental
   property
   Sarah owned and rented out her residential rental property in the
   2025–26 income year. She travelled to the property to repair
   damages caused by tenants during the year.

   As the investment is a residential property and Sarah isn't in the
   business of letting rental properties or an excluded entity, she
   can't claim a deduction for her travel expenses.


Commercial rental properties, for example factories or office blocks,
are not residential rental properties. If you own or have an ownership
interest in a commercial rental property, you can claim a deduction for
travel expenses incurred in earning your rental income from the
property.




   Example: ownership interest in commercial
   property
  Kei is the sole owner of a commercial rental property. Her
  husband, Bert, occasionally drives to the rental property in his
  own car to undertake maintenance. As he has no ownership
  interest in the property, Bert can't claim travel expenses.
  Similarly, since Kei didn't travel to the property to undertake the
  maintenance, she can't claim a deduction.

  As the property is a commercial rental property rather than a
  residential rental property, if Kei and Bert co-owned the property,
  Bert could share his travel expenses with Kei in line with their
  legal interest in the property.


  Example: individual with a commercial
  investment property
  In the 2025–26 income year, Greg purchased a shopfront and
  leased the property to Paul. Paul used the shopfront to operate a
  bakery and paid rent to Greg under a 12-month lease contract.

  Greg travelled to the shopfront to inspect the property at the end
  of the tenancy agreement. As the property was used for
  commercial purposes, Greg can claim the travel expenses.



In the business of letting rental properties
You can claim your travel expenses if you are in the business of letting
rental properties. Generally, owning one or several rental properties
will not be considered being in the business of letting rental properties.

If you are an individual and you receive income from letting property to
a tenant, or multiple tenants, you are not typically carrying on a
business of letting rental properties. Generally, we consider your
activities are a form of investment rather than a business, so you can't
claim deductions for travel expenses.

Entities that can claim travel expenses
You can claim travel expenses, if you're a:

  corporate tax entity

  superannuation plan that isn't a self-managed superannuation fund

  public unit trust
   managed investment trust

   unit trust or a partnership, where all of the members are entities of a
   type listed above.



   Example: an excluded entity in 2025–26
   Terry's Pty Ltd, a property manager, incurred travel expenses in
   2025–26 to inspect a tenanted residential investment property.
   Since Terry's Pty Ltd is a corporate tax entity (a company), it can
   claim a deduction for travel expenses.




Travel expenses you can't claim
Even if you are eligible to claim travel expenses, you still can't claim for
expenses related to:

   your personal use of the property or for purely private purposes

   carrying out general maintenance of the property while it's not
   genuinely available for rent

   undertaking repairs, where those repairs are not because of
   damage or wear and tear incurred while you rented out the
   property.

For example, if you travel to undertake initial repairs before you rent
the property for the first time, these are capital expenses and may be
included as part of the cost base for capital gains tax calculation when
the property is being sold later.

If your travel expenses are partly for private purposes and partly
related to the rental property, you can only claim the amount relating
to the rental property.

Travel expenses before you purchase
You can't claim for travel expenses to inspect a property before you
buy it.

You also can't claim for travel expenses to (or other costs for) rental
seminars about helping you find a rental property to invest in.
Seminars are only tax deductible if they relate to earning rental income
from your existing rental property. When a seminar teaches you how to
locate a suitable rental property to buy, you can't claim a deduction
against rental income for the cost of the seminar because the costs
incurred are 'too soon' before the start of the income producing
activity.

Some promoters have incorrectly told taxpayers that they can claim
the cost of their travel to and from a property they may purchase. You
can't claim these costs for properties within Australia nor overseas.


Travel expenses you can claim
If you are in the business of letting rental properties or an excluded
entity, and eligible to claim travel expenses, the types of expenses you
can claim include:

  preparing the property for new tenants (except for the first tenants)

  inspecting the property during or at the end of tenancy

  undertaking repairs, where those repairs are because of damage or
  wear and tear incurred while you rented out the property

  maintaining the property, such as cleaning and gardening, while it is
  rented or genuinely available for rent

  collecting the rent

  visiting your agent to discuss your rental property.

For more information, see Rental expenses.


Car travel
If you are in the business of letting rental properties or an excluded
entity, and eligible to claim travel expenses, and you use your own car
to travel to inspect your rental property or to collect rent, you must use
the same method to calculate your deductions as work-related car
expenses.


Overnight travel
If you are in the business of letting rental properties or an excluded
entity, and eligible to claim travel expenses you can claim a deduction
for travel expenses for travelling to your rental property if:
  you own a rental property that is far away from where you live

  it would be unreasonable to expect you not to stay near the rental
  property overnight when making an inspection

  your main purpose in travelling was to inspect and maintain the
  rental property.

Where you stay overnight, you can claim meals and accommodation.

Where your trip is mainly for private purposes (for example, having a
holiday) and inspecting the property is incidental to that main purpose,
you can't claim the costs of getting to your destination or returning
home. You can only claim local expenses incurred after you arrive at
your destination that are directly related to the property inspection
such as taxi fares to and from the rental property. You may also be
able to claim a proportion of your accommodation expenses.


Overseas travel
If you are in the business of letting rental properties or an excluded
entity, and eligible to claim travel expenses, and you are an Australian
resident and own a rental property overseas, you may travel overseas
on holiday and inspect your rental property at the same time.

If the main purpose of the trip is a holiday, you can't claim the cost of
getting there. You can only claim local expenses incurred after you
arrive at your destination that are directly related to inspecting the
property, such as taxi fares to and from the rental property. You may
also be able to claim a deduction for part of your accommodation
expenses.

You must be able to show your reason for visiting the rental property.

The records you keep, such as invoices for your accommodation or
airline tickets, will help you do this.


Record keeping for travel expenses
If you can claim your travel expenses and you travel over a
considerable distance to inspect a rental property (for example,
interstate), you need written records to show that you travelled and
what expenses you incurred.

Written records can include:
   a travel diary

   receipts for

      airline tickets

      fuel

      accommodation

      other purchases while travelling

      items you used for repairs and maintenance that you purchased
      when you travelled to, or stayed near, the rental property.

If you spend 6 or more nights away from where you live, you must
keep a travel diary or similar document that shows the nature of the
activities, dates, places, times and duration of your activities and
travel.




QC 22093



Asbestos-affected properties
If you own an asbestos-affected investment property,
check the deductions you can claim. CGT may apply if you
sell it.

Last updated 22 June 2026



Claiming expenses
Asbestos contamination may mean a property can no longer be rented
out or must be vacated for a time. In that case some deductions may
still apply, including for:

   interest on loans against the property (these are deductible for the
   whole year, if the property is later rented out after remediation)

   expenses such as council rates, water and land tax

   repairs and maintenance – for example, ensuring living areas are
   sealed from contaminated areas, such as ceiling, internal cavities
  and subfloor

  decline in value of written-off and replacement depreciating assets,
  such as carpet

  capital works for replacement buildings, fences and similar.

Expenses for capital works are claimed over a period of 40 or
25 years. The decline in value of depreciating assets is also generally
claimed over several years.

For more information on expenses you can claim, see TR 2004/4
Income tax: deductions for interest incurred prior to the
commencement of, or following the cessation of, relevant income
earning activities.


Environmental protection costs
If your asbestos-related remediation expenses aren't covered by the
above deductions, costs to remove asbestos from a rental property
can be classified as an environmental protection activity under section
40-755 of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997.

For more information, see TR 2020/2 Income tax: deductions for
expenditure on environmental protection activities.


Government buy-back program
If you participate in a buy-back program, the CGT implications will vary
depending on your situation.

If the property was solely used as your main residence for the entire
period of ownership, there are no CGT implications on the disposal of
your property.

If you used the property to produce income, there are CGT
implications. These will depend on your circumstances, including if it
was ever your main residence and how long you've owned it.




QC 43708
Apartment building defect
expenses
If you own an apartment in a building complex, you may be
able to claim deductions for shared expenses to fix
defects.

Last updated 22 June 2026



Apartment building defects
The apartment complex
If you own an apartment in a building complex, you may have a shared
responsibility to fix building defects. You may need to make:

   a contribution to a special body corporate levy (this is most
   common)

   changes as required by a state government building authority.

This is usually for common property. Common property is generally all
areas of the land, building and external structures not contained within
your apartment.


The apartment itself
If your apartment is a rental property, you can claim deductions for
repairs, environmental protection activities and capital works on the
same basis as if you:

   directly own the building

   were directly paying the expense.


Repairs and maintenance you can claim
You can claim an immediate deduction for the expenses you incur
when you contribute to the repair or maintenance of either:

   an apartment you use to earn rental income
  part of the building complex that you hold or use as part of earning
  rental income.

These expenses must meet the requirements for a deduction as a
repair or maintenance. That is, they must relate directly to wear and
tear or damage because of renting out the property. Repairs generally
involve a replacement or renewal of a worn out or broken part.
Maintenance is work done to prevent deterioration, defects or damage.
For example, repainting of the outside parts of the building where the
paint is peeling is a repair as well as maintenance.

You can't claim an immediate deduction for capital repairs or capital
maintenance. For example, expenses which are capital or of a capital
nature include:

  replacement of an entire structure or unit of property

  improvement in the function of the replacement item

  initial repairs to rectify damage, defects or deterioration that
  existed at the time of purchasing a property.


Combustible cladding replacements you
can claim
You can claim a deduction for costs you incur to replace or contribute
to the replacement of combustible cladding to meet government
requirements.

To be able to claim a deduction, you must replace the combustible
cladding with fire resistant cladding. You treat the replacement of the
cladding as capital works. This is because we treat the replacement of
cladding as:

  an entire functional structure (being the outer covering of the
  building)

  an improvement in the function of the outer covering of the building.

This means the building is no longer a fire hazard and becomes fire
resistant as an improved functional operation of the cladding.

You can claim a deduction for the amount you contribute over a period
of either 25 or 40 years. That is, 4% or 2.5% of the cost of the
 improvement being allowed in each year. See Table 1 – types of rental
 property construction that qualify for deduction.

 The replacement of combustible cladding doesn't meet the
 requirements to be deductible as a repair or environmental protection
 activity.


 Environmental protection activities you
 can claim
 You can claim a deduction for costs you incur to carry out
 environmental protection activities.

 Environmental protection activities are those you carry out because
 your earning activities will result or likely result in the need for you to:

    prevent, fight or remedy pollution

    treat, clean up, remove or store waste.

 You can't claim a deduction as environmental protection activities
 where you incur the costs to either:

    replace building products that don't conform to statutory legal
    requirements

    remove building products that don't conform to statutory legal
    requirements.

 For more information on deductions and strata titles, see:

    TR 97/23 Income tax: deductions for repairs

    TR 2020/2 Income tax: deductions for expenditure on
    environmental protection activities

    TR 2015/3 Income tax: matters relating to strata title bodies
    constituted under strata title legislation paragraphs 40 and 41.




 QC 63879



Our commitment to you
We are committed to providing you with accurate, consistent and clear
information to help you understand your rights and entitlements and meet
your obligations.

If you follow our information and it turns out to be incorrect, or it is
misleading and you make a mistake as a result, we will take that into
account when determining what action, if any, we should take.

Some of the information on this website applies to a specific financial year.
This is clearly marked. Make sure you have the information for the right year
before making decisions based on that information.

If you feel that our information does not fully cover your circumstances, or
you are unsure how it applies to you, contact us or seek professional
advice.


Copyright notice
© Australian Taxation Office for the Commonwealth of Australia

You are free to copy, adapt, modify, transmit and distribute this material as
you wish (but not in any way that suggests the ATO or the Commonwealth
endorses you or any of your services or products).
