TD 2012/1 - Income tax: can Part IVA of the Income
Tax Assessment Act 1936 apply to deny a deduction
for some, or all, of the interest expense incurred in
respect of an 'investment loan interest payment
arrangement' of the type described in this
Determination?

    This cover sheet is provided for information only. It does not form part of TD 2012/1 - Income
tax: can Part IVA of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1936 apply to deny a deduction for some, or
all, of the interest expense incurred in respect of an 'investment loan interest payment
arrangement' of the type described in this Determination?


  There is a Compendium for this document: TD 2012/1EC .




Generated on: 26 September 2026, 09:10:25 AM
                                                                       Taxation Determination

                                                                    TD 2012/1
Page Status: legally binding                                                                    Page 1 of 7




Taxation Determination
Income tax: can Part IVA of the Income Tax
Assessment Act 1936 apply to deny a deduction for
some, or all, of the interest expense incurred in respect
of an ‘investment loan interest payment arrangement’
of the type described in this Determination?

           This publication provides you with the following level of protection:
This publication (excluding appendixes) is a public ruling for the purposes of the Taxation
Administration Act 1953.
A public ruling is an expression of the Commissioner’s opinion about the way in which a relevant
provision applies, or would apply, to entities generally or to a class of entities in relation to a
particular scheme or a class of schemes.
If you rely on this ruling, the Commissioner must apply the law to you in the way set out in the ruling
(unless the Commissioner is satisfied that the ruling is incorrect and disadvantages you, in which
case the law may be applied to you in a way that is more favourable for you – provided the
Commissioner is not prevented from doing so by a time limit imposed by the law). You will be
protected from having to pay any underpaid tax, penalty or interest in respect of the matters
covered by this ruling if it turns out that it does not correctly state how the relevant provision applies
to you.


Ruling
1.      Yes, provided that the interest is otherwise an allowable deduction. In the context
of Part IVA of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1936 (ITAA 1936) 1 a taxpayer’s purpose of
‘paying their home loan off sooner’ or ‘owning their own home sooner’ does not prevent the
application of section 177F to an ‘investment loan interest payment arrangement’ of the
type described in paragraph 3 of this Determination.




1
    All legislative references are to the ITAA 1936 unless otherwise indicated.
Taxation Determination

TD 2012/1
Page 2 of 7                                                      Page Status: legally binding

Date of effect
2.       This Determination applies to years of income commencing both before and after
its date of issue. However, this Determination will not apply to taxpayers to the extent that
it conflicts with the terms of settlement of a dispute agreed to before the date of issue of
this Determination (see paragraphs 75 to 76 of Taxation Ruling TR 2006/10).




Commissioner of Taxation
7 March 2012
                                                                                     Taxation Determination

                                                                                 TD 2012/1
Page Status: not legally binding                                                                 Page 3 of 7


Appendix 1 – Explanation
       This Appendix is provided as information to help you understand how the
Commissioner’s preliminary view has been reached. It does not form part of the proposed
binding public ruling.

Explanation
Investment loan interest payment arrangements
3.      While investment loan interest payment arrangements may vary in the precise loan
and security details, they all have similar financial and purported tax effects. An investment
loan interest payment arrangement will exhibit all or a significant number of the features
set out as follows:
           (a)     The taxpayer(s) own at least two properties: one property is the taxpayer(s)’
                   residence and the other is used to derive rent (‘investment property’).
           (b)     The taxpayer(s) have an outstanding loan which was used to acquire the
                   residence (or refinance an earlier loan used to acquire the residence)
                   (‘home loan’), an outstanding loan which was used to acquire the
                   investment property (or refinance an earlier loan used to acquire the
                   investment property) (‘investment loan’) and a line of credit or similar
                   borrowing facility with an approved limit (‘line of credit’). All three loan
                   products are typically (but not always) provided by a single financial
                   institution.
           (c)     The respective interest rates on the home loan and investment loan are
                   typically at or about the same rate. The interest rate on the line of credit is
                   typically (but not always) higher by a small margin (for example, 0.15%).
           (d)     The investment loan is typically an interest-only loan for a specified period
                   with principal and interest repayments required thereafter, or the
                   interest-only period may be extendable.
           (e)     The line of credit typically has no minimum monthly repayment obligations
                   provided the balance remains below the approved limit. Alternatively, it may
                   require minimum monthly repayments equal to the accrued interest.
           (f)     The home loan, investment loan and the line of credit are each secured
                   against the taxpayer(s)’ residence and/or investment property.
           (g)     The line of credit is drawn down to pay the interest on the investment loan
                   as it falls due. Where no repayments are required on the line of credit, the
                   taxpayer(s) will generally not make any repayments, which results in interest
                   on the line of credit being capitalised and compounded. Where monthly
                   interest repayments are required on the line of credit, the taxpayer(s) meet
                   such repayments from their cash flows.
           (h)     Typically all or a significant proportion of the taxpayer(s)’ available cash
                   inflows (including that which the taxpayer(s) otherwise might reasonably be
                   expected to use to pay the interest on the investment loan) are deposited
                   into their home loan or an ‘acceptable loan account offset account’, 2 which
                   has the effect of reducing the interest otherwise payable on the home loan.

2
    See Taxation Ruling TR 93/6 Income tax and fringe benefits tax: loan account offset arrangements.
Taxation Determination

TD 2012/1
Page 4 of 7                                                             Page Status: not legally binding

           (i)     If the line of credit reaches its approved limit before the home loan has been
                   repaid, the taxpayer(s) may apply to increase the limit on the line of credit in
                   conjunction with a corresponding decrease in the available ‘redraw’ amount
                   in the home loan.
4.     It is often said that taxpayers who enter into an investment loan interest payment
arrangement do so for the purpose of ‘paying their home loan off sooner’ or ‘owning their
own home sooner’.
5.     Taxpayers who have entered into an investment loan interest payment
arrangement may be entitled to deductions for the interest incurred on the line of credit
under section 8-1 of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997.


Can Part IVA apply?
6.      Part IVA is a general anti-avoidance rule. Part IVA gives the Commissioner the
power to cancel a ‘tax benefit’ (or part of a ‘tax benefit’) that has been obtained, or would,
but for section 177F, be obtained, by a taxpayer in connection with a scheme to which
Part IVA applies.
7.         In broad terms, Part IVA will apply where the following requirements are satisfied:
           •       there is a scheme 3 (see section 177A);
           •       a taxpayer has obtained, or would but for section 177F obtain, a tax benefit
                   in connection with the scheme (see section 177C); and
           •       the dominant purpose of a person who entered into or carried out the
                   scheme, or any part of the scheme, was to enable the relevant taxpayer to
                   obtain a tax benefit in connection with the scheme, or to enable the relevant
                   taxpayer and another taxpayer or other taxpayers each to obtain a tax
                   benefit in connection with the scheme (paragraph 177D(b)).
8.     The application of Part IVA depends on a careful weighing of all the relevant facts
and surrounding circumstances of each case. Therefore, in the absence of all relevant
information it is not possible to state definitively whether a particular arrangement or
transaction will attract Part IVA. However, an investment loan interest payment
arrangement of the type described in paragraph 3 is capable of attracting the operation of
Part IVA.
9.      The precise description of the scheme for the purposes of Part IVA will depend on
the facts of the particular case. However, in the context of considering whether Part IVA
applies to an investment loan interest payment arrangement the scheme would normally
include some or all of the elements described in paragraph 3 of this Determination.




3
    The scheme must have been entered into after 27 May 1981, or carried out, or commenced to be carried out,
    after 27 May 1981 (other than a scheme that was entered into on or before that date): see section 177D.
                                                                                 Taxation Determination

                                                                             TD 2012/1
Page Status: not legally binding                                                            Page 5 of 7

10.      In relation to this type of scheme it might reasonably be expected that if the
scheme had not been entered into or carried out, the taxpayer(s) would have met the
interest payments on the investment loan out of their own cash flow rather than use the
line of credit. Thus, the taxpayer(s) would not have incurred any interest, or would have
incurred less interest, on the line of credit. Consequently, the taxpayer(s) would not have
been entitled to any deductions in respect of any such interest or would have been entitled
to a smaller deduction. Accordingly, the relevant tax benefit obtained by the taxpayer(s) in
connection with the scheme under paragraph 177C(1)(b) is (or includes) either:
        •        the whole amount of the allowable deduction for interest incurred on the line
                 of credit; or
        •        the difference between the otherwise allowable deduction for interest
                 incurred on the line of credit and the amount of interest incurred on the line
                 of credit that would have been an allowable deduction if the scheme had not
                 been entered into or carried out.
11.    A key question, for Part IVA purposes, is whether the identified scheme was
entered into or carried out by a person for the dominant purpose of enabling the relevant
taxpayer to obtain a tax benefit in connection with the scheme.
12.     Paragraph 177D(b) requires the drawing of a conclusion about purpose from the
eight objective matters identified in that provision. The conclusion to be reached is the
conclusion of a reasonable person. 4 The provision does not require, or even permit, any
inquiry into the subjective purpose or motive of the relevant taxpayers or others who
entered into or carried out the scheme. 5
13.    Further, an objective purpose of the taxpayer(s) of ‘paying their home loan off
sooner’ does not prevent Part IVA from applying to an investment loan interest payment
arrangement. As was noted in the joint judgment of the High Court in Spotless: 6
        A particular course of action may be…both ‘tax driven’ and bear the character of a rational
        commercial decision. The presence of the latter characteristic does not determine the
        answer to the question whether, within the meaning of Part IVA, a person entered into or
        carried out a ‘scheme’ for the ‘dominant purpose’ of enabling the taxpayer to obtain a ‘tax
        benefit.
14.     Further, Gleeson CJ and McHugh J of the High Court noted in Hart 7 that:
        …a transaction may take such a form that there is a particular scheme in respect of which a
        conclusion of the kind described in s 177D is required, even though the particular scheme
        also advances a wider commercial objective.
15.     Callinan J in Hart 8 similarly distinguished between objectives that are ‘entirely
irreproachable and proper’ and the ‘means adopted to achieve these results’.
16.     Therefore, the means by which the taxpayer(s) achieve their objective of ‘paying
their home loan off sooner’ may result in the requirements of Part IVA being satisfied.




4
  FC of T v. Spotless Services Ltd & Anor (1996) 186 CLR 404 at 421; 96 ATC 5201 at 5210.
5
  FC of T v. Hart & Anor [2004] HCA 26 at [65]; 2004 ATC 4599 at [65].
6
  FC of T v. Spotless Services Ltd & Anor (1996) 186 CLR 404 at 416; 96 ATC 5201 at 5206.
7
  FC of T v. Hart & Anor [2004] HCA 26 at [16]; 2004 ATC 4599 at [16].
8
  FC of T v. Hart & Anor [2004] HCA 26 at [96]; 2004 ATC 4599 at [96].
Taxation Determination

TD 2012/1
Page 6 of 7                                                   Page Status: not legally binding

17.  In the context of applying paragraph 177D(b) to an investment loan interest
payment arrangement the following general observations can be made:
       (a)     In respect of arrangements that include all, or a significant number, of the
               elements set out in paragraph 3 of this Determination the manner in which
               the scheme is entered into or carried out is generally explicable only by the
               taxation consequences. For instance, apart from the purported availability of
               additional tax deductions, it appears to make little (if any) financial sense for
               the taxpayer(s) to, in effect, fund repayments on a home loan using a line of
               credit that has the same or a slightly higher interest rate than the home loan.
       (b)     In many of these arrangements a careful analysis of the terms and
               conditions indicates that the interest rate on the line of credit is both
               notionally and in substance higher than the interest rate payable on the
               home loan.
       (c)     Apart from the purported availability of additional tax deductions, the
               taxpayer(s)’ financial position under the scheme is generally no better (and
               possibly worse) than it would have been if the arrangement had not been
               entered into. The increase in the line of credit balance is matched by an
               equal reduction in the balance (or effective balance) of the taxpayer(s)’
               home loan.
       (d)     A key feature of the investment loan interest payment arrangement is the
               use of the line of credit to pay the interest on the investment loan. This
               results in all or most of the interest on the investment loan, in effect, being
               capitalised. That is, the payment of the investment loan interest is deferred.
               This deferral has the economic effect of allowing the taxpayer(s) to repay
               the home loan at a faster rate than would otherwise be possible: the
               taxpayer(s) are able to pay an amount equivalent to the deferred investment
               loan interest on the home loan.
       (e)     In many of these arrangements a careful analysis of the all the facts
               (including the taxpayer(s)’ financial circumstances and the relevant terms
               and conditions of the relevant agreements) indicates that the investment
               loan interest payment arrangement will have only a limited lifespan. The
               circumstances often demonstrate that the arrangement will only last for the
               period during which the taxpayer(s) have non-deductible interest expenses
               (for example home loan interest), and that once the debt that gave rise to
               the non-deductible interest expense is repaid the taxpayer(s) are likely to
               revert to making the payments on their investment loan out of their cash
               flow rather than using the line of credit. In many cases the taxpayer(s) are
               simply reverting to what they were doing prior to entering the arrangement.
       (f)     If the taxpayer(s)’ residence is used as security for either the investment
               loan or the line of credit, the taxpayer(s) will not actually own an
               unencumbered home any faster under the scheme than would have been
               the case if they had not entered into the arrangement.
18.     Accordingly, it would be open for a reasonable person to conclude, having regard
to the matters in paragraph 177D(b), that one or more of the parties that entered into or
carried out the scheme did so for the dominant purpose of enabling the taxpayer(s) to
obtain a tax benefit in connection with the scheme. If a reasonable person would reach
such a conclusion then Part IVA applies to the scheme and the Commissioner would be
entitled to cancel under paragraph 177F(1)(b) the tax benefit. That is, the relevant interest
incurred on the line of credit would not be deductible to the taxpayer(s).
                                                                    Taxation Determination

                                                                TD 2012/1
Page Status: not legally binding                                              Page 7 of 7


References
Previous draft:                                Legislative references:
TD 2011/D8                                     - ITAA 1936
                                               - ITAA 1936 Pt IVA
Related Rulings/Determinations:                - ITAA 1936 177A
TR 93/6; TR 2006/10                            - ITAA 1936 177C
                                               - ITAA 1936 177C(1)(b)
Subject references:                            - ITAA 1936 177D
                                               - ITAA 1936 177D(b)
- borrowings & loans
                                               - ITAA 1936 177F
- cancellation of tax benefits
                                               - ITAA 1936 177F(1)(b)
- deductions & expenses
                                               - ITAA 1997 8-1
- expenses of borrowing
- interest expenses
                                               Case references:
- Part IVA
- rental property loan interest expenses       - FC of T v. Hart & Anor [2004] HCA 26;
- schemes & shams                                2004 ATC 4599; (2004) 55 ATR 712
- tax benefits under tax avoidance schemes     - FC of T v. Spotless Services Ltd & Anor
- tax planning, avoidance & evasion              [1996] HCA 34; (1996) 186 CLR 404; 96
                                                 ATC 5201; (1996) 34 ATR 183

ATO references
NO:            1-38NS0XC
ISSN:          1038-8982
ATOlaw topic: Income Tax ~~ Deductions ~~ borrowing expenses
               Income Tax ~~ Deductions ~~ interest expenses
