                                                                                               Taxation Ruling
                    Australian
                    Taxation                                                         TR 2000/2
                    Office
                                   FOI status: may be released                                    Page 1 of 19



                                   Taxation Ruling
                                   Income tax: deductibility of interest on
                                   moneys drawn down under line of credit
                                   facilities and redraw facilities

Contents                    Para   Preamble
What this Ruling is about      1   The number, subject heading, Class of person/arrangement, Date of
Ruling                        12   effect and Ruling parts of this document are a ‘public ruling’ for the
Date of effect                26
                                   purposes of Part IVAAA of the Taxation Administration Act 1953 and
                                   are legally binding on the Commissioner. The remainder of the
Explanations                  27
                                   document is administratively binding on the Commissioner. Taxation
Alternative views             48   Rulings TR 92/1 and TR 97/16 together explain when a Ruling is a
Examples                      53   public ruling and how it is binding on the Commissioner.
Detailed contents list        74
                                   What this Ruling is about
                                   Class of person/arrangement
                                   1.     This Ruling considers the deductibility of interest incurred by
                                   borrowers on moneys drawn down under line of credit facilities and
                                   moneys redrawn under other loans offering redraw facilities. It
                                   considers the operation of section 8-1 of the Income Tax Assessment
                                   Act 1997 (‘ITAA 1997’) (formerly subsection 51(1) of the Income Tax
                                   Assessment Act 1936 (‘ITAA 1936’)) where the borrowed money
                                   has been applied for both income producing and non-income
                                   producing purposes.
                                   2.      The cases cited in this Ruling that consider deductibility under
                                   subsection 51(1) of the ITAA 1936 have equal application to section
                                   8-1 of the ITAA 1997. All references to subsection 51(1) should be
                                   taken as including a reference to section 8-1, and vice versa.
                                   3.      This Ruling applies only to line of credit facilities as described
                                   in paragraphs 4 to 8 below and redraw facilities as described in
                                   paragraphs 8 to 11 below. This Ruling does not deal with facilities
                                   that permit the capitalisation of interest or the applicability of the
                                   ‘refinancing principle’ for funds borrowed by business partnerships as
                                   discussed in Taxation Ruling TR 95/25.


                                   Line of credit facilities
                                   4.      A line of credit facility is a credit facility taken out with a
                                   financial institution under which a borrower may draw down funds up
                                   to an agreed credit limit. There are a number of different facilities
                                   available. There may be one or more loan contracts and one or more
Taxation Ruling

TR 2000/2
Page 2 of 19                                   FOI status: may be released


borrowers. The line of credit may be fully drawn, i.e., the taxpayer
borrows up to the credit limit, or partly drawn, i.e., the taxpayer draws
only some of the funds leaving credit available to be utilised at a later
date. If the facility is fully drawn the taxpayer can only draw further
funds if payments in excess of interest, fees and charges are made into
the facility. Where the facility is partly drawn the taxpayer can draw
down further funds up to the credit limit without making repayments
of principal.
5.      The facility may operate with one account that is used for all
draw downs. Funds may be drawn down from a single line of credit
account up to the full amount of the available credit limit and may be
used for either income producing or non-income producing purposes
or both.
6.      Alternatively, the facility may be divided into a number of
sub-accounts by agreement between the lender and the borrower.
Some financial institutions allow the sub-accounts to be held by
different borrowers. Some sub-accounts may be used for income
producing purposes (‘investment sub-account’) and others may be
used for non-income producing purposes (‘private sub-account’).
Some sub-accounts may be used for mixed income producing and
non-income producing purposes (‘mixed purpose sub-account’).
Funds may be drawn down from each sub-account up to an allocated
portion of the overall credit limit.
7.     While the focus of this ruling is on mixed purpose sub-
accounts, the same principles apply to single line of credit accounts
used for mixed purposes.
8.       In most cases, the lender requires the borrower to make a
minimum monthly payment equal to the interest, fees and charges that
have accrued on the facility. A payment into that facility in excess of
the interest, fees and charges, is a repayment of principal. Under these
facilities, the borrower is able to make payments to reduce the amount
owing under the line of credit account or sub-account at any time.
Any payments over and above the required minimum payments for
interest, fees and charges increase the funds available to the borrower
to draw down, subject to the agreed credit limit for that account or
sub-account. Where a taxpayer makes a payment over and above the
required minimum payment, the taxpayer can direct this payment to
be allocated to a particular sub-account.


Redraw facilities
9.     There are a number of loan arrangements under which a
borrower may redraw previous repayments of the loan principal.
There may be one or more loan contracts and one or more borrowers.
The loan may be for income producing purposes, non-income
                                                           Taxation Ruling

                                                 TR 2000/2
FOI status: may be released                                    Page 3 of 19



producing purposes or mixed purposes. The lender prescribes a
minimum payment that is due on the loan. This minimum payment is
at least equal to the amount of interest, fees and charges that accrues
on the loan, but more commonly is a principal and interest payment.
10.      The redraw facility allows the borrower to make payments
over and above the minimum payments required under the loan
agreement, and then permits the borrower to redraw an amount
equivalent to those payments in excess of interest, fees and charges at
a later time. Those payments in excess of interest, fees and charges
reduce the borrower’s outstanding loan debt and money redrawn
increases the outstanding loan debt.
11.     A taxpayer may use the money redrawn for income producing
purposes, non-income producing purposes or mixed purposes
regardless of the use of the original borrowed funds. In some cases
the consent of the lender is required to redraw funds and the redraw
may be subject to other conditions affecting the amount and frequency
of redraws. Redraws may also be subject to the consent of the loan
guarantors.

Ruling
Line of credit facilities
12.     Where a line of credit facility is divided into sub-accounts and
each sub-account is used for a specific purpose, interest is fully
deductible where funds drawn down on an investment sub-account
continue to be used exclusively for an income producing purpose.
Interest is not deductible where funds drawn down on a private sub-
account are used for a non-income producing purpose.
13.      Where interest accrues periodically on the outstanding balance
of a mixed purpose line of credit sub-account, the deductibility of
accrued interest is determined by considering the application of the
borrowed funds for income producing and non-income producing
purposes. The original application of the borrowed funds will not
determine deductibility where funds borrowed under a line of credit
facility have been recouped or withdrawn from the original use and
are reapplied to a new use, e.g., upon sale of an asset purchased with
borrowed funds.
14.     Where borrowed money applied to a particular use is recouped
and redirected to another use, it is necessary to examine that new
application of those borrowed funds in considering the deductibility of
interest. Where there are changes in the use of money borrowed under
a line of credit facility, or in the amount of borrowed money used for a
particular purpose, the deductibility of the interest accrued on that part
of the outstanding debt will be determined by considering the
advantages sought from that new application of those funds. Interest
Taxation Ruling

TR 2000/2
Page 4 of 19                                   FOI status: may be released


will be deductible under section 8-1 to the extent that it is incurred on
that part of the outstanding borrowed money used at that time for an
income producing purpose.
15.     Where a taxpayer has a mixed purpose sub-account, the
interest needs to be apportioned between the income producing and
non-income producing purposes. Apportionment must be made on a
fair and reasonable basis. One approach that we accept as fair and
reasonable in relation to the apportionment of interest that has accrued
on a daily basis on a mixed purpose account is set out in the following
paragraphs. We accept that this approach to apportionment is not the
only approach that is fair and reasonable.
16.     Where interest accrues daily under a mixed purpose sub-
account, a taxpayer is entitled to a deduction in respect of that part of
the interest that has accrued on the portion of the outstanding daily
loan balance attributable to an income producing purpose. In
calculating the portion of the outstanding daily loan balance
attributable to an income producing purpose, any repayment of
principal is applied proportionately against the outstanding balance of
amounts applied to income producing and non-income producing
purposes respectively, at the time the repayment is made. However,
there are two exceptions.


First Exception - Borrowed money recouped and repaid
17.      Where money borrowed and applied to a particular use (the
‘relevant use’) is recouped in whole or in part, in the sense that the
amount or some part of it is recovered ( e.g., on the sale of an asset
purchased with borrowed funds) that part of the outstanding balance
of the mixed purpose line of credit debt which had been applied to the
relevant use can no longer be regarded as continuing to be applied to
that use. Where borrowed funds recouped are repaid to the mixed
purpose sub-account in reduction of the outstanding balance, those
funds have ceased to be outstanding funds used for any purpose. The
effect of the repayment of the recouped funds to the mixed purpose
sub-account is to reduce only that part of the outstanding line of credit
debt applied to the previous use of those funds. The use of the
balance of borrowed funds still outstanding is unaffected by the
recoupment and repayment in these circumstances unless the amount
of the sale proceeds paid into the mixed purpose sub-account exceeds
the amount drawn down and applied to the relevant use (the ‘relevant
debt portion’). This would occur, for example, where the asset is sold
at a profit and part or all of the recouped borrowed funds and profit
are paid into the mixed purpose sub-account. To the extent that the
payment exceeds the relevant debt portion, such excess amount
(i.e., the profit component) will be taken to have reduced prorata the
amounts borrowed and applied to uses other than the relevant use.
                                                              Taxation Ruling

                                                 TR 2000/2
FOI status: may be released                                      Page 5 of 19




Second Exception - Refinancing mixed purpose debt
18.     A taxpayer may choose to refinance a debt outstanding on a
mixed purpose sub-account by borrowing an equivalent amount under
two separate accounts or sub-accounts. If the sums borrowed under
those two separate accounts are equivalent to the respective income
producing and non-income producing parts of the existing outstanding
debt, we accept that interest accrued on the debt incurred in
refinancing the income producing portion of the mixed purpose debt
will be deductible.


Apportionment calculations
19.      Where interest on borrowed money accrues daily, we accept
that it would be unnecessarily onerous to require a manual daily
apportionment calculation. We accept that the interest accrued in a
month is deductible under section 8-1 where it is calculated using an
apportionment approach based on the average outstanding principal
used that month for income producing purposes. The deductible
portion of interest accruing in each month is calculated as follows:


      total interest accrued      X     deductible interest
      for the month                     percentage figure


20.    The deductible interest percentage figure is calculated as
follows:
            (A + B)
                           x       100
            (C + D)
where
A = opening balance (beginning of month) of outstanding principal
used for income producing purposes;
B = closing balance (end of month) of outstanding principal used for
income producing purposes;
C = opening balance of total outstanding principal;
D = closing balance of total outstanding principal;
Note: the closing balance for one month is the opening balance for
the next month.
21.    Where a taxpayer makes repayments over and above the
required minimum payment and the line of credit facility comprises
one mixed purpose sub-account only, the taxpayer cannot choose to
Taxation Ruling

TR 2000/2
Page 6 of 19                                   FOI status: may be released


notionally allocate the repayments to a particular portion of the total
debt, e.g., the non-income producing portion.


Redraw facilities
22.    The deductibility of interest on a further borrowing of money
under a redraw facility depends upon the use to which the redrawn
funds are put.
23.     Where the original borrowing is for non-income producing
purposes and the taxpayer uses the redrawn funds wholly or partly for
income producing purposes, that part of the accrued interest
attributable to the redrawn funds used for income producing purposes
is deductible.
24.     Similarly, where the original borrowing is for income
producing purposes and the taxpayer uses the redrawn funds wholly or
partly for non-income producing purposes, that part of the accrued
interest attributable to the redrawn funds used for non-income
producing purposes is not deductible.
25.     Where a taxpayer uses redrawn funds for a different purpose to
the original borrowing in circumstances described in paragraphs 23
or 24, the loan account becomes a mixed purpose account and the
same principles discussed above in relation to mixed purpose line of
credit sub-accounts will apply to the mixed purpose loan account.
There is an ongoing need to apportion interest on a mixed purpose
loan account. That apportionment needs to be made on a fair and
reasonable basis. Subsequent repayments are apportioned between the
outstanding debt used at that time for income producing and non-
income producing purposes. However, the two exceptions for
borrowed money recouped and repaid and for the refinancing of a
mixed purpose debt, discussed above at paragraphs 17 and 18 in
relation to mixed purpose line of credit sub-accounts, are equally
applicable to mixed purpose loan accounts.


Date of effect
26.      This Ruling applies to years commencing both before and after
its date of issue. However, the Ruling does not apply to taxpayers to
the extent that it conflicts with the terms of settlement of a dispute
agreed to before the date of issue of the Ruling (see paragraphs 21
and 22 of Taxation Ruling TR 92/20).
                                                          Taxation Ruling

                                                TR 2000/2
FOI status: may be released                                  Page 7 of 19




Explanations
27.     The nature of an interest expense was recently considered by
the Full High Court in Steele v. DC of T 99 ATC 4242; 41 ATR 139.
The Court said, at 99 ATC 4242 at 4248; (1999) 41 ATR 139 at 148,
that:
        ‘… interest is ordinarily a recurrent or periodic payment which
       secures, not an enduring advantage, but, rather, the use of
       borrowed money during the term of the loan. According to the
       criteria noted by Dixon J in Sun Newspapers Ltd and
       Associated Newspapers Ltd v FC of T it is therefore ordinarily
       a revenue item.’
28.     Although interest is ordinarily a revenue expense, it will only
be deductible under subsection 8-1 if the expense can be characterised
as an outgoing that is incurred in gaining or producing assessable
income or is necessarily incurred in carrying on a business for the
purpose of gaining or producing assessable income and must not
otherwise be excluded from being deductible, e.g. an outgoing of a
private or domestic nature.
29.     The character of interest is determined by the purpose of the
borrowing. Generally, the purpose of a borrowing can be determined
from the use of borrowed funds and outgoings of interest ordinarily
draw their character from that use (see Fletcher & Ors v. FC of T 91
ATC 4950; (1991) 22 ATR 613). It is recognised that it may be
appropriate to distinguish between the purpose of the taxpayer in
borrowing the money and the use to which the borrowed funds are put
in an appropriate case (see Steele v. DC of T 99 ATC 4242, at 4251;
(1999) 41 ATR 139, at 150).
30.      The term ‘use’ in this context does not necessarily require a
strict tracing approach to the application of the borrowed money (see
FC of T v. JD Roberts; FC of T v. Smith 92 ATC 4380; (1992) 23
ATR 494). Rather, the characterisation of interest on borrowed
money (and the purpose of the borrowing) is ascertained by reference
to the advantages sought from the use of the borrowed funds. In
Kidston Goldmines Ltd v. FC of T 91 ATC 4538 at 4545-6; (1991) 22
ATR 168 at 176-7, Hill J. stated:
       ‘In most cases, the purpose of the borrowing will be
       ascertained from the use to which the borrowed funds were
       put…
       To be deductible the outgoing, or in a case of apportionment a
       part of an indivisible outgoing, must be seen to be incidental
       and relevant to the activity which is directed to the gaining or
       production of assessable income. In the normal case, the fact
       that funds borrowed have been borrowed for the purpose of
Taxation Ruling

TR 2000/2
Page 8 of 19                                   FOI status: may be released


        that activity and can still, in the year of income in which the
        deduction is claimed, be seen as having that purpose, will lead
        readily to the conclusion that the interest will be incidental and
        relevant to the income producing activity. Again, in the usual
        case the application of funds for an income producing purpose
        will demonstrate the relevant connection between the outgoing
        and the income producing activity. Indeed there is much to be
        said for the view that the tests of purpose and application of
        funds are but two sides of the one matter.’
31.      However, the original purpose of the borrowing and use of the
borrowed funds will not always determine the deductibility of interest.
Where borrowed money has been used to purchase an income
producing asset and that asset subsequently has been sold, the original
use of that money will not necessarily determine the character of the
interest expense accruing on those borrowed funds. In such a case the
question of the deductibility of interest ‘… must be resolved by
determining whether the essential character of the interest outgoings
after the sale … was such that it can be said that those outgoings were
incurred by the respondent in the course of the gaining or production
of assessable income or, having regard to the business then carried on
by it, they were necessarily incurred by the respondent in carrying on
that business.’ (F.C. of T. v. Riverside Road Pty. Ltd. (in liq.) 90 ATC
4567 at 4576; 21 ATR 499 at 509).
32.     In some circumstances, for example where the loan contract
imposes a continuing obligation to pay interest for a specified period,
the sale of income producing assets purchased with those borrowed
funds may not necessarily result in the immediate cessation of the
relevant connection with the income earning activity. For example, in
Riverside Road the Full Federal Court held at 90 ATC 4567 at 4576;
(1990) 21 ATR 499 at 509 that:
        ‘ It seems to us that it does not follow from De Bavay’s case…
        that the mere fact that the land and buildings were sold
        necessarily results in the conclusion that as and from the date
        of sale the whole of the interest incurred was not deductible.
        The respondent, pursuant to the contractual arrangements it
        had entered into, was obliged … to pay interest until 1 May
        1979. Had it sought to discharge its obligation to the
        mortgagee, it could have been required to pay interest to this
        date.’
33.     In the circumstances of that case, the contractual obligation to
pay interest for a fixed period meant that the sale of the assets did not
alter the essential character of the interest payments incurred until that
loan was discharged.
34.    The deductibility of interest under the loan agreement
considered by the Court in Riverside Road is distinguishable from the
                                                             Taxation Ruling

                                                  TR 2000/2
FOI status: may be released                                     Page 9 of 19



deductibility of interest under a line of credit facility.
The observations of the Full Federal Court in FC of T v. Brown
99 ATC 4600 at 4608; (1999) 43 ATR 1 at 10 provide support for this
view. The Full Federal Court stated at 99 ATC 4608; 43 ATR 10 that:
        ‘Had the loan agreement in question been a “roll over”
        business loan facility which entitled the taxpayer conducting
        the business, on the date of each monthly payment, to elect to
        repay the principal and thereby avoid incurring liability for
        interest or to “roll over” the loan and continue to be liable for
        interest, that may have been a different situation. In that
        circumstance there may be considerable force in the contention
        that the occasion of the liability was the election to “roll over”
        the loan on each monthly payment date, rather than any
        liability arising under the terms of the original loan agreement
        establishing the terms of the “roll over” facility. In such a case
        the cessation of business or sale of the income-producing asset
        acquired with the borrowed funds might properly be regarded
        as breaking the nexus in much the same way as certain post
        cessation interest payments were not allowed in Riverside
        Road.’
35.      While the Full Federal Court did not express a concluded view
on this issue, their comments suggest that in determining the
deductibility of interest under a ‘roll over’ debt facility, the ‘occasion’
of the liability to pay interest was to be found in the circumstances
concurrent with the accrual of the liability to pay interest which arose
on each recurring monthly interest date.
36.      We believe the same principle will apply to a line of credit
facility where interest accrues daily and the outstanding debt can be
repaid at any time. The obligation to pay interest under the terms of,
and for the period of, the original borrowing can not be regarded as
the ‘occasion’ of the interest liability which accrues in a subsequent
period after a taxpayer has made an election not to repay the
outstanding principal under a line of credit facility. A line of credit
debt has a continuing opportunity for repayment which distinguishes it
from the type of loan debt considered in Brown.
37.    Where the funds borrowed under a line of credit remain
outstanding, we believe the deductibility of interest is to be
determined by considering the ongoing application of those borrowed
funds. Interest is considered to be the cost of retaining the use of the
outstanding line of credit funds in the period in which that interest
accrues. Where borrowed funds are recouped from the sale of an
income producing asset purchased with that money, the connection
between the interest expense and the income producing use of that
asset will be broken when the asset is sold. Interest on those borrowed
funds will only be deductible after that time if it can be established
Taxation Ruling

TR 2000/2
Page 10 of 19                                 FOI status: may be released


that the accrued interest continues to be incurred in the course of
deriving assessable income or in carrying on a business. For this to be
the case under a line of credit, there would need to be a sufficient
connection between the accrual of interest in a period and any new
application for income producing purposes of those recouped
borrowed funds. Deductibility of interest on those borrowed funds
will be determined by a consideration of the advantages sought from
that new use to which those funds are redirected.
38.     Taxation Ruling TR 95/25 also outlines some general
principles governing deductibility of interest.


Further borrowings
39.    Where a loan facility allows for redraws of extra repayments,
we consider those redraws constitute new borrowings of funds that
cannot be traced to the extra repayments. In this regard the term
'redraw' is a misnomer. It is in effect a new borrowing of funds.
Similarly, a draw down on a line of credit that has not been fully
drawn is a new borrowing of funds.
40.     In our view, it is not correct to characterise the reduced loan
balance as comprising the previous loan balance with a notional offset
credit available in respect of extra repayments as if those extra
repayments were standing to the credit of the borrower in a separate
account in the books of the lender. The extra repayments do not
create a debt due by the lender to the borrower. Those funds used to
make extra repayments simply cease to exist as an asset of the
borrower after being used to discharge part of the loan debt. In our
view, the redraw facility does not involve separate loan and deposit
accounts of the type discussed in paragraphs 6 to 8 of TR 93/6.
41.     In the case of a repayment of principal on a line of credit, the
borrower acquires a contractual right to borrow a further amount equal
to the difference between the reduced drawn-down amount and the
available credit limit. That right to borrow further funds is a
contractual right under the loan agreement permitting the borrower to
draw down funds up to the agreed credit limit. The available credit is
not an asset of the borrower and the available credit limit can be
varied by the lender upon review.
42.     Similarly, under a redraw facility, the loan agreement gives the
borrower the right, subject to restrictions in some cases, to borrow a
further amount up to the balance of the loan debt that would have been
outstanding if the minimum loan repayments required under the loan
agreement had been made. The extra repayments do not create a debt
payable by the lender to the borrower and are not an asset of the
borrower after they have been used to discharge part of the loan debt.
                                                          Taxation Ruling

                                                TR 2000/2
FOI status: may be released                                 Page 11 of 19



43.     We consider a draw-down from a line of credit account or sub-
account, or a redraw from a loan account, is a separate borrowing.
Therefore, the deductibility of the interest on that separate borrowing
depends on whether the interest is incurred in gaining or producing
assessable income or is necessarily incurred in carrying on a business
for the purpose of gaining or producing assessable income. To the
extent borrowings are used for income producing purposes, that part
of the accrued interest attributable to those borrowings is deductible.
Conversely, that part of the accrued interest attributable to borrowings
used for non-income producing purposes is not deductible.
44.     The balance outstanding on a mixed purpose line of credit sub-
account or a mixed purpose loan account is an undivided single debt
owed by the borrower to the lender. When repayments of principal
are made, it is not considered possible to direct those payments to only
that part of the borrowed funds used for a particular purpose as if it
were a separate debt. While it may be possible to trace the uses to
which different parts of the borrowed funds are put, it is considered
repayments of principal need to be applied proportionately to reduce
the balance of the outstanding principal attributable to income
producing use and non-income producing use respectively, e.g., if
70% of an outstanding line of credit sub-account debt is used for
income producing purposes, 70% of any repayment would be in
respect of that part of the outstanding debt. However, there are two
exceptions.


First Exception – Borrowed money recouped and repaid
45.     Where money borrowed and applied to a particular use is
recouped, e.g., on the sale of an asset purchased with borrowed funds,
that part of the outstanding balance of the mixed purpose debt can no
longer be regarded as applied to that use. Where the borrowed funds
recouped are paid into the mixed purpose account or sub-account,
those funds have ceased to be outstanding funds used for any purpose.
The effect of the repayment of the recouped funds to the mixed
purpose sub-account is to reduce only that part of the outstanding line
of credit debt applied to the previous use of those funds. Example
four, at paragraph 66 of this ruling, outlines the practical
application of these principles.


Second Exception – Refinancing mixed purpose debt
46.    A taxpayer may choose to refinance a mixed purpose debt by
borrowing an equivalent amount under two separate accounts or sub-
accounts. Where a mixed purpose line of credit sub-account debt is
replaced by two new debts and the advantage sought by these
borrowings is the refinancing of the respective parts of the previous
Taxation Ruling

TR 2000/2
Page 12 of 19                                 FOI status: may be released


debt used at that time for income producing and non-income
producing purposes, we consider that a strict tracing approach is not
appropriate. It is relevant to bear in mind the comments of Dixon CJ.
in Hallstroms Pty. Ltd. v. FC of T (1946) 72 CLR 634, cited with
approval by Hill J in FC of T v. JD Roberts; FC of T v. Smith 92 ATC
4380, at 4391; (1992) 23 ATR 494, at 507, that the question of
characterisation depends on:
        ‘… what the expenditure is calculated to effect from a practical
        and business point of view, rather than upon the juristic
        classification of legal rights…’
47.     The sole purpose of the borrowing used to refinance money
used at that time for income producing purposes is to continue to have
the use of those funds for income producing purposes. Similarly, the
sole purpose of the borrowing used to refinance money used at that
time for non-income producing purposes is to continue to have the use
of those funds for non-income producing purposes. Therefore, we
accept that interest accrued on the debt incurred in refinancing the
income related portion of the previous mixed purpose debt will be
deductible.


Alternative views
48.     It has been suggested that if funds were originally borrowed
for income producing purposes and there is no requirement to repay
those funds, the occasion of the interest liability remains the income
producing activities of the taxpayer. The decision in FC of T v. Brown
99 ATC 4600; 43 ATR 1 is cited in support of this proposition.
However, the comments made in that case in relation to ‘roll over’
loan facilities support our view of the law outlined above.
49.     It has also been suggested that funds withdrawn from a loan
account or a line of credit account which can be attributed to the extra
repayments made, simply represent a withdrawal of funds temporarily
‘parked in the loan’. This view depends upon a characterisation of the
extra repayments as effectively remaining an asset of the borrower,
available to the borrower by virtue of the contractual right to redraw
them. As discussed above, we believe this view is not correct. The
extra repayments have been used to discharge part of the loan or line
of credit debt and the subsequent redraw or draw down is funded by a
subsequent increasing of the loan or line of credit debt. In our view,
the redraw or draw down is a new borrowing of money. The
deductibility of the interest payable on those new borrowings depends
upon the advantages sought from the use of those funds.
50.    It has been further suggested that the taxpayer can allocate a
repayment to that portion of borrowed moneys used for a particular
purpose. The decision in FC of T v. Carberry 88 ATC 5005; (1988)
                                                         Taxation Ruling

                                               TR 2000/2
FOI status: may be released                                Page 13 of 19



20 ATR 151, is cited in support of this view. In Carberry a husband
and wife borrowed money to acquire undivided real estate comprising
a private residence and a kindergarten business and premises. The
taxpayers applied the proceeds of sale of a previous private residence
towards the purchase of the new property. The proceeds from the sale
of the previous residence exceeded the cost attributable to the
purchase of the new residence. In the circumstances, the
Administrative Appeals Tribunal held at first instance that the whole
of the funds borrowed to finance the acquisition of the property was
used by the partnership to purchase the kindergarten.
51.     The decision in Carberry is relevant to establishing the
original use of the borrowed funds. On the facts of that case it was
open to the tribunal to conclude that the whole of the borrowed funds
were applied to an income producing use. In reaching this conclusion,
the Tribunal did not apply a strict tracing approach to the borrowed
funds. However, as recognised by Davies J in that case on appeal to
the Federal Court, an apportionment of interest would have been
required if the Tribunal had found as a matter of fact that the
borrowed funds had been applied to both income producing and
private purposes.
52.    The decision in Carberry is not inconsistent with the basis of
apportionment outlined in this ruling in relation to cases involving
borrowed funds applied to both income producing and non-income
producing purposes.


Examples
Example one
53.     Barry has a line of credit with the XYZ Bank. His credit limit
is $100,000 and when that facility is established on 1 April he draws
down $80,000 to invest in income producing shares. Barry's net
salary of $4,000 per month is paid directly into the line of credit
account on the last day of the month and interest and charges are
debited on the same day. Barry redraws $2,000 per month on the first
day of the month for living expenses. On 30 April, Barry makes a
lump sum repayment of $20,000 from the proceeds of the sale of a
private yacht, in addition to the $4,000 repayment from his salary. On
1 June, Barry draws down a further $20,000 for home renovations, in
addition to the $2,000 draw down for living expenses.
Taxation Ruling

TR 2000/2
Page 14 of 19                                 FOI status: may be released


Barry's transactions are summarised below:
  Date      Borrowings Payments         Account      Income       Non-
            and Interest                Balance      Portion     income
                                                       (see      Portion
                                                     below)        (see
                                                                 below)
1 Apr             80,000               80,000        80,000       NIL
30 Apr              400    24,000      56,400        56,400       NIL
1 May              2,000               58,400        56,400      2,000
31 May              292      4,000     54,692        52,819      1,873
1 Jun             22,000               76,692        52,819     23,873
30 Jun              383      4,000     73,075        50,328     22,747


54.    The repayments of $20,000 and $4,000 made on 30 April first
pay the accrued interest of $400 and then reduce the outstanding
principal used at that time for income producing purposes to $56,400.
55.     The interest of $400 accrued in April is wholly attributable to
borrowed funds used for income producing purposes and is therefore
fully deductible.
56.     The $4,000 repayment on 31 May first pays the accrued
interest of $292 and then proportionately reduces the outstanding
principal used at that time for income producing purposes and for non-
income producing purposes. The proportionate reduction in the
outstanding principal attributable to income producing purposes will
be $3,708 x 56,400/58,400 = $3,581, giving a balance of the
outstanding principal used for income producing purposes at that time
of $52,819. The proportionate reduction of principal attributed to
non-income producing purposes will be $3,708 x 2,000/58,400 =
$127. The balance of the outstanding principal used for non-income
producing purposes at that time, therefore, will be reduced by $127 to
$1,873.
57.    The interest of $292 accrued in May is related partly to the
outstanding principal used that month for income producing purposes
and partly to the outstanding principal used that month for non-income
producing purposes. The amount of interest Barry can claim as a
deduction for May is calculated as:
                                                         Taxation Ruling

                                                  TR 2000/2
FOI status: may be released                                Page 15 of 19



          292           x      Deductible interest
                                  percentage

         = 292          x     (56,400 + 52,819)      x     100
                              (56,400 + 54,692)

         = 292          x         98.3%

         = 287
Barry can claim a deduction of $287 for interest for the month of May.
58.    The borrowings on 1 June of $20,000 for home renovations
and $2,000 for living expenses were for non-income producing
purposes. The outstanding principal used for non-income producing
purposes at 1 June will, therefore, be $1,873 (see paragraph 33 above)
+ $22,000 = $23,873.
59.     The $4,000 repayment on 30 June first pays the interest
accrued that month of $383 and then proportionately reduces the
outstanding principal used at that time for income producing purposes
and for non-income producing purposes. The proportionate reduction
in the outstanding principal used at that time for income producing
purposes will be $3,617 x 52,819/76,692 = $2,491, giving a balance of
the outstanding principal used at 30 June for income producing
purposes of $50,328. The balance of the outstanding principal used
for non-income producing purposes at 30 June will, therefore, be
reduced by $1,126 to $22,747.
60.    The interest of $383 accrued in June is related partly to the
outstanding principal used that month for income producing purposes
and partly to the outstanding principal used that month for non-income
producing purposes. The amount of interest Barry can claim as a
deduction for June is calculated as:
          383           x      Deductible interest
                                  percentage


          =383          x     (52,819 + 50,328)      x   100
                              (54,692 + 73,075)


          =383          x         80.7%


          =309
Barry can claim a deduction of $309 for interest for the month of June.
Taxation Ruling

TR 2000/2
Page 16 of 19                                 FOI status: may be released


Example two
61.    Bill is a computer programmer. He is offered a job in Darwin
and decides to relocate his family there. He borrows $200,000 from
the bank and purchases a house in Darwin. He makes the minimum
monthly payment of $1650. After two years the balance on Bill's
home loan is $186,000.
62.     Bill receives a $50,000 windfall and decides to pay this money
off his home loan. This reduces the balance to $136,000.
63.    Bill is then offered a job in Perth. He decides to take the job
and relocate his family. He decides to rent out the house in Darwin
and borrow to purchase a new residential property in Perth. Bill
redraws $50,000 from the Darwin loan and uses this as a deposit for
the new home in Perth.
64.     Bill can deduct the interest accrued on the outstanding loan
principal of $136,000 that is related to the Darwin house from the date
that property is available for rental. Those borrowed funds are used at
that time for income producing purposes. As the new borrowing of
$50,000 is used as a deposit on the residence in Perth, the interest on
that borrowing will not be deductible as it is incurred for a non-
income producing purpose.


Example three
65.     Rod has a mixed purpose line of credit debt comprising $5,000
used for investments in income producing shares and $5,000 used for
holidays. Rod refinances the income producing and non-income
producing components of this mixed purpose debt with borrowings
under two new line of credit sub-accounts. The interest accrued on
the line of credit sub-account used solely to refinance the borrowed
money used for investments in income producing shares will be fully
deductible. The interest accrued on the line of credit sub-account used
solely to refinance the borrowed money used for holidays will not be
deductible.


Example four
66.     Bob has a mixed purpose line of credit sub-account debt of
$30,000 with $20,000 applied to the purchase of a private vehicle and
$10,000 applied to purchase income producing shares in company
XYZ. Bob sells half the XYZ shares for $6,000 and pays that amount
into the mixed purpose sub-account.
67.   The debt outstanding after the repayment is related to the
$20,000 applied to the purchase of the private vehicle and $5,000 of
                                                            Taxation Ruling

                                                  TR 2000/2
FOI status: may be released                                   Page 17 of 19



borrowed funds applied to purchase that half of the income producing
XYZ shares still held by Bob.
68.     The $5,000 of borrowed funds previously applied to purchase
that half of the XYZ shares that were sold is no longer applied to that
use after being recouped and repaid on the sale of those shares. The
previously outstanding debt related to the XYZ shares is therefore
reduced to $5,000 when that portion of the borrowed money recouped
is repaid to the mixed purpose sub-account.
69.     When the additional amount of $1,000 obtained from the sale
of half the XYZ shares is paid into the mixed purpose sub-account, it
is apportioned between the outstanding funds used for income
producing and non-income producing purposes. That is, the payment
into the mixed purpose sub-account of $1,000, in addition to that
portion of the borrowed funds recouped on the sale of half the XYZ
shares, reduces the outstanding debt applied to the XYZ shares still
held by $200 to $4,800 and reduces the debt applied to the private
vehicle by $800 to $19,200.


Example five
70.    All facts are the same as in example four except Bob sells all
the XYZ shares for $8,000 and pays that amount into the mixed
purpose sub-account.
71.     For a line of credit, the deductibility of interest depends upon
the continued use of borrowed funds for income producing purposes.
After the sale of the XYZ shares, there are no longer any outstanding
funds then used for income producing purposes. Therefore, there
would be no deduction allowed for interest accruing on the
outstanding line of credit debt after the sale of the XYZ shares.
72.     The $22,000 outstanding after the sale of the shares and
repayment of the sale proceeds, comprises $20,000 of borrowed funds
that continue to be applied to the purchase of a private vehicle and
$2,000 of borrowed funds still outstanding that was lost on the sale of
the income producing shares. After the sale of those shares, the
outgoing of interest on that $2,000 ceases to be for the purpose of
retaining the use of those funds for income producing purposes.
The interest incurred after the sale relates to financing the capital loss
made on the sale of those shares. The connection with the previous
income producing use of the funds invested in the XYZ shares is
broken on the sale of those shares. The ‘occasion’ of the incurring of
that interest is no longer the obligation to pay interest under the terms
and conditions applicable to the previous period of the borrowing
arrangement.
Taxation Ruling

TR 2000/2
Page 18 of 19                                    FOI status: may be released


73.     No deduction would be allowable under s 8-1 ITAA 1997 in
respect of interest on the borrowed funds lost on the sale of the
income producing XYZ shares.


Detailed contents list
74.      Below is a detailed contents list for this draft Ruling:
                                                               Paragraph
What this Ruling is about                                              1
Class of persons/arrangement                                           1
Line of credit facilities                                              4
Redraw facilities                                                      9
Ruling                                                                12
Line of credit facilities                                             12
   First Exception – Borrowed money recouped and repaid               17
   Second Exception – Refinancing mixed purpose debt                  18
   Apportionment calculations                                         19
Redraw facilities                                                     22
Date of effect                                                        26
Explanations                                                          27
Further borrowings                                                    39
   First Exception – Borrowed money recouped and repaid               45
   Second Exception – Refinancing mixed purpose debt                  46
Alternative views                                                     48
Examples                                                              53
Example one                                                           53
Example two                                                           61
Example three                                                         65
Example four                                                          66
Example five                                                          70
Detailed contents list                                                74
                                                            Taxation Ruling

                                                 TR 2000/2
FOI status: may be released                                   Page 19 of 19




Commissioner of Taxation
1 March 2000

Previous draft:                      -   Fletcher and Ors v. FC of T 91
Previously issued in draft form as       ATC 4950; (1991) 22 ATR 613
TR 1999/D3                           -   FC of T v. JD Roberts; FC of T v.
                                         Smith 92 ATC 4380; (1992) 23
Related Rulings/Determinations:          ATR 494
TR 93/6; TR 95/25; TR 98/22          -   Kidston Goldmines Ltd v. FC of T
                                         91 ATC 4538; (1991) 22 ATR 168
Subject references:                  -   FC of T v. Riverside Road Pty. Ltd.
- accrued interest                       (in liq.) 90 ATC 4567; (1990) 21
- home loan interest expenses            ATR 499
- interest expenses                  -   FC of T v. Brown 99 ATC 4600;
- negative gearing                       (1999) 43 ATR 1
- rental property loan interest      -   Hallstroms Pty. Ltd. v. FC of T
   expenses                              (1946) 72 CLR 634
                                     -   FC of T v. Carberry 88 ATC 5005;
Legislative references:                  (1988) 20 ATR 151.
- ITAA 36 51(1)
- ITAA 97 8-1

Case references:
- Steele v. DC of T 99 ATC 4242;
   (1999) 41 ATR 139

ATO references:
NO        98/11078-1
BO
FOI number: I 102018
ISSN: 1039-0731
