                                                                                                Taxation Ruling
                   Australian
                   Taxation
                   Office
                                                                                    TR 97/23
                                   FOI status: may be released                                     page 1 of 52




                                   Taxation Ruling
                                   Income tax: deductions for repairs

other Rulings on this topic
IT 180; IT 242; IT 2183;           This Ruling, to the extent that it is capable of being a 'public ruling' in
TR 95/21; TR 97/16
                                   terms of Part IVAAA of the Taxation Administration Act 1953, is a
                                   public ruling for the purposes of that Part. Taxation Ruling TR 92/1
contents                    para   explains when a Ruling is a public ruling and how it is binding on the
What this Ruling is about     1    Commissioner.
Previous Rulings              11
Ruling                        12
                                   What this Ruling is about
Date of effect                80
Explanations                  83   Class of person/arrangement
Examples                    162    1.    This Ruling explains the circumstances in which expenditure
Detailed contents list      188    incurred by a taxpayer for repairs is an allowable deduction under
                                   section 25-10 of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 ('the ITAA
                                   1997') - formerly contained in section 53 of the Income Tax
                                   Assessment Act 1936 ('the ITAA 1936'). It consolidates most prior
                                   Taxation Rulings and Taxation Determinations on repairs. The Ruling
                                   deals with:
                                         (a)    the meaning of the word 'repairs' in subsection 25-10(1),
                                                and in the former subsection 53(1);
                                         (b)    repair expenditure of a capital nature;
                                         (c)    the distinction between repair and either renewal or
                                                reconstruction - what is meant by an 'entirety';
                                         (d)    the distinction between a repair and an improvement;
                                         (e)    expenditure to remedy defects, damage or deterioration in
                                                existence at the date of acquisition of property (that is, an
                                                initial repair);
                                         (f)    some specific issues in construing section 25-10 and the
                                                former section 53;
                                         (g)    expenditure for repairs before property is held, occupied or
                                                used for income producing or business purposes;
                                         (h)    expenditure for repairs to property previously used for
                                                non-income producing purposes;
                                         (i)    expenditure for repairs to property used for the purpose of
                                                providing non-deductible entertainment; and
Taxation Ruling


TR 97/23
page 2 of 52                                         FOI status: may be released



      (j)      expenditure for repairs to property used only partly for
               income producing purposes during a year of income.
2.    The following expressions in section 25-10 and the former
section 53, in column 1, are abbreviated at times in this Ruling as
indicated in column 2:


Expression in section 25-10             Abbreviation in this Ruling
          (column 1)                              (column 2)
'premises (or part of premises),        'property'
plant, machinery, tools or articles'
'held or used'                          'held, etc.,'
'purpose of producing assessable        'income purposes'
income'
Expression in section 53                Abbreviation in this Ruling
          (column 1)                              (column 2)
'premises, or part of premises,         'property'
plant, machinery, implements,
utensils, rolling stock or articles'
'held, occupied or used'                'held, etc.,'
'purpose of producing assessable        'income purposes'
income, or in carrying on a
business for that purpose'


3.    In this Ruling, a reference to:
      ·        'section 8-1' means, as appropriate, 'section 8-1 of the
               ITAA 1997 or the former subsection 51(1) of the ITAA
               1936';
      ·        'section 25-10' means, as appropriate, 'section 25-10 of the
               ITAA 1997 or the former subsection 53(1) of the ITAA
               1936';
      ·        'section 42-15' means, as appropriate, 'section 42-15 of the
               ITAA 1997 or the former subsection 54(1) of the ITAA
               1936';
      ·        'the old law' means 'the former subsection 53(1) of the
               ITAA 1936'; and
      ·        'the new law' means 'section 25-10 of the ITAA 1997'.
4.   In this Ruling, the expression 'initial repair' refers to a repair by a
taxpayer that remedies some defect in property or makes good damage
                                                               Taxation Ruling


                                                   TR 97/23
FOI status: may be released                                       page 3 of 52



to, or deterioration of, property being a defect, damage or
deterioration:
      (a)    existing when the property was acquired from another
             person (whether by purchase, lease or licence); and
      (b)    not arising from the operations of the taxpayer who incurs
             the repair expenditure.
5.    A repair is not an 'initial repair' simply because it is the first
repair made after property is acquired. It is an 'initial repair' if repair is
due when the property is acquired in the sense that the property has
defects, damage or deterioration or is not in good order and suitable
for use in the way intended.
6.     This Ruling does not consider in detail the circumstances in
which a loss or outgoing for repairs may be deductible under the
general deduction provision (section 8-1) or under the depreciation
deduction provision (section 42-15). Repairs may include some
maintenance work but only if it is done in conjunction with work that
is a repair. Repairs may not involve only maintenance work. If non-
capital maintenance work is not a repair, it may be deductible under
section 8-1. If expenditure on maintenance work is of a capital nature,
it may be depreciable under section 42-15.
7.    Section 8-10 of the ITAA 1997 provides a rule against double
deductions. If expenditure on repairs is potentially deductible under
both sections 25-10 and 8-1, section 8-10 provides that you can deduct
only under the provision that is most appropriate. Which provision is
the most appropriate is an objective question. In our view, if both
sections 25-10 and 8-1 allow you to deduct the same amount, section
25-10, being the provision that deals specifically with repair
expenditure, is the most appropriate provision.
8.    Under the old law, if expenditure on repairs is potentially
deductible under both subsections 53(1) and 51(1), we consider it is
more 'appropriate' in exercising the discretion in subsection 82(1) (no
double deductions) that the deduction be allowed under subsection
53(1) rather than 51(1): see Case Q98 83 ATC 487 at 489; Case 26
(1983) 27 CTBR (NS) at 160.
9.    The Ruling does not deal with the question whether expenditure
for repairs after property ceases to be held, occupied or used for
income producing or business purposes is deductible under section
25-10 or under the old law. Taxation Ruling IT 180 addresses this
question for the old law. Because section 25-10 expresses the same
ideas as the old law, IT 180 also applies to the new law: Taxation
Ruling TR 97/16, paragraph 17.
10. The Ruling also does not deal with the question whether
expenditure for repairs may be included in the cost base of an asset for
Taxation Ruling


TR 97/23
page 4 of 52                                          FOI status: may be released



the purposes of the capital gains provisions, nor with the depreciation
and other capital allowance provisions in the income tax law.


Previous Rulings
11. This Ruling replaces Taxation Rulings IT 153, IT 2089 (which
was withdrawn on 3 September 1997), IT 2116, IT 2149, IT 2183,
IT 2587 and Taxation Determination TD 92/180. These Rulings and
the Determination are now withdrawn.


Ruling
Meaning of the word 'repairs'
(Note: see explanation at paragraphs 83 to 107 and examples at paragraphs 162 and
163 of this Ruling)


Context of the word 'repairs' in section 25-10
12. In its context in section 25-10, the word 'repairs' relates to work
done to 'premises (or part of premises), plant, machinery, tools or
articles'. The word 'repairs' appeared in a similar context in the old
law. While the things specified in the section cover a wide range of
property, they do not extend to all classes of property, e.g., intangible
property.


Ordinary meaning of 'repairs'
13. The word 'repairs' has its ordinary meaning. It ordinarily means
the remedying or making good of defects in, damage to, or
deterioration of, property to be repaired (being defects, damage or
deterioration in a mechanical and physical sense) and contemplates the
continued existence of the property.
14. Work done to prevent or anticipate defects, damage or
deterioration (in a mechanical or physical sense) in property is not in
itself a 'repair' unless it is done in conjunction with remedying or
making good defects in, damage to, or deterioration of, the property.
15. Repair for the most part is occasional and partial. It involves
restoration of the efficiency of function of the property being repaired
without changing its character and may include restoration to its
former appearance, form, state or condition. A repair merely replaces
a part of something or corrects something that is already there and has
become worn out or dilapidated. Works can fairly be described as
                                                            Taxation Ruling


                                                TR 97/23
FOI status: may be released                                    page 5 of 52



'repairs' if they are done to make good damage or deterioration that has
occurred by ordinary wear and tear, by accidental or deliberate damage
or by the operation of natural causes (whether expected or unexpected)
during the passage of time.
16. To repair property improves to some extent the condition it was
in immediately before repair. A minor and incidental degree of
improvement, addition or alteration may be done to property and still
be a repair. If the work amounts to a substantial improvement,
addition or alteration, it is not a repair and is not deductible under
section 25-10.


Restoration of the efficiency of function of the property
17. 'Repairs', in its context in section 25-10, is directed to the
holding or use of property for income purposes. Under the old law,
the property had to be 'held, occupied or used' for income purposes.
Holding or use of property for this purpose indicates that, in
determining whether work done to property constitutes 'repairs', it is
more significant to consider whether the work restores the efficiency
of function of the property without changing its character than it is to
consider whether the appearance, form, state or condition of the
property is exactly restored.


Need for exercise of judgment
18. We recognise that in some cases practical difficulty may be
involved in deciding, for the purpose of deductibility of repair
expenditure under section 25-10, whether the property is returned to
its original efficiency of function by particular work done to it. We
accept that there can be sound commercial and other reasons for doing
work on property to improve its appearance, condition or functional
efficiency. The question is necessarily one of fact and degree. It
requires a careful weighing of the various factors discussed in this
Ruling and exercising judgment in the light of decided case law and
practical commercial experience. If a taxpayer is experiencing
practical difficulty in deciding whether particular repair expenditure is
deductible, he or she can seek a private binding ruling from the
Australian Taxation Office ('the ATO').


Maintenance work - whether 'repair'
19. Work done partly to remedy or make good defects, damage or
deterioration does not cease to be a repair if it is also done partly -
even largely - to prevent or anticipate defects, damage or deterioration
(in a mechanical or physical sense) in property or in rectifying defects
Taxation Ruling


TR 97/23
page 6 of 52                                       FOI status: may be released



in their very early stages. Repairs are not confined to rectifying
defects, damage or deterioration that have already become serious.
Work done to property not in need of repair, however, is not repair
work and any expenditure for the work in these circumstances is not
deductible under section 25-10.
20. Some kinds of maintenance work are 'repairs' in terms of section
25-10, for example, painting plant or business premises to rectify
existing deterioration and to prevent further deterioration. Other
kinds of maintenance work, such as oiling, brushing or cleaning
something that is otherwise in good working condition and only
requires attention to prevent the possibility of its going wrong in the
future, are not 'repairs' in terms of the section . Expenditure on the
latter kind of maintenance work may be an allowable deduction under
section 8-1.


Question of fact and degree
21. What is a 'repair' for the purposes of section 25-10 is a question
of fact and degree in each case having regard to the appearance, form,
state and condition of the particular property at the time the
expenditure is incurred and to the nature and extent of the work done
to the property.
22. If work done to property goes beyond what is a 'repair' in terms
of section 25-10, any expenditure for the work is not deductible. The
work may go beyond 'repairs' in terms of the section if it:
      (a)      changes the character of the property; or
      (b)      does more than restore its efficiency of function.
(The cost of this work may be deductible under other provisions of the
income tax law, e.g., section 8-1 or section 42-15 or Division 43 of the
ITAA 1997 (or the former Division 10C or 10D of Part III of the
ITAA 1936).)


Work done solely to meet requirements of regulatory bodies
23. To determine whether work done to meet requirements of
regulatory bodies, or to conform with their standards, constitutes
'repairs' for the purposes of section 25-10, it is necessary to consider
the general principles and the various factors discussed in this Ruling.
24. Expenditure on work that modifies property to satisfy regulatory
requirements is allowable under section 25-10 as repair expenditure
only if the work:
                                                            Taxation Ruling


                                                 TR 97/23
FOI status: may be released                                    page 7 of 52



      (a)    remedies or makes good a defect in, damage to, or
             deterioration (in a mechanical or physical sense) of,
             property; and
      (b)    restores the efficiency of function of the property; and
      (c)    does not produce a new and different function for the
             property nor add to the property a function that it did not
             previously have.
25. The expenditure must not be of a capital nature, e.g., an
improvement.


Expenditure to control health risks from dangerous substances
26. Work done to property in controlling health risks associated with
the use of dangerous substances (such as asbestos, chloroflurocarbons
('CFCs'), chromium, dioxin, cyanide, pesticides and arsenic) does not
qualify as a 'repair' for the purposes of section 25-10 unless the work
remedies or makes good defects in, damage to, or deterioration (in a
mechanical or physical sense) of, the property.
27. An example of expenditure that is not deductible as a repair is
the cost of removing asbestos insulation from factory walls (if the
insulation is not in need of repair) and replacing it with modern
insulation material. This work does not constitute the rectification of
a defect in a mechanical or physical sense as envisaged by section
25-10. The asbestos insulation functions efficiently as insulation. It is
being replaced because of the health risk it might pose to factory
occupants, not to 'repair' the factory in the ordinary sense of the word.
The costs, if incurred on or after 19 August 1992, are deductible under
subsection 82BK(1) of the ITAA 1936 as allowable environmental
protection expenditure.
28. Another example of costs that are not deductible under section
25-10 is the cost of removing CFC gases from air conditioning plant
and replacing them with non-ozone depleting gases. This work does
not remedy any defect (in a mechanical or physical sense) in the
holding, etc., of the air conditioning plant for income purposes, even
though it is beneficial to public health. The costs, if incurred on or
after 19 August 1992, are deductible under subsection 82BK(1) of the
ITAA 1936 as allowable environmental protection expenditure.
29. Expenditure to control health risks associated with the use of
dangerous substances that is not deductible under section 25-10 may
be deductible under section 8-1 or Subdivision CA of Division 3 of
Part III of the ITAA 1936.
30. The provisions of Subdivision CA (comprising sections 82BH to
82BR of the ITAA 1936) allow a deduction for expenditure, including
Taxation Ruling


TR 97/23
page 8 of 52                                          FOI status: may be released



expenditure of a capital nature, incurred on or after 19 August 1992 by
a taxpayer carrying on eligible environmental protection activities.
These activities are the preventing, combating or rectifying pollution
(which here means contamination of the environment by harmful or
such potentially dangerous substances as asbestos and CFCs) in the
circumstances specified in paragraph 82BM(1)(a) of the ITAA 1936,
and the treating, cleaning up, removing or storing of waste in the
circumstances specified in paragraph 82BM(1)(b) of that Act. The
environmental protection provisions are provisions of last resort. If a
deduction for environmental protection activities is allowable under
another provision of the Act, the expenditure is not deductible under
Subdivision CA (see subsection 82BL(3) of the ITAA 1936).


Repair expenditure of a capital nature
(Note: see explanation at paragraphs 108 to 112 and example at paragraph 164 of
this Ruling)


In what situations is repair expenditure of a capital nature?
31. Expenditure incurred for repairs is not deductible under section
25-10 if the expenditure is of a capital nature. Subsection 25-10(3)
precludes a deduction for capital expenditure.
32. Expenditure for repairs to property is capital expenditure if any
of the following subparagraphs applies:
      (a)      The guidelines for distinguishing between capital and
               revenue outgoings laid down by the courts for the purposes
               of the forerunners of section 8-1 in such cases as Sun
               Newspapers Ltd v. FC of T (1938) 61 CLR 337; (1938) 5
               ATD 87 and Hallstroms Pty Ltd v. FC of T (1946) 72
               CLR 634; (1946) 8 ATD 190 indicate that the expenditure
               is incurred in establishing, replacing or enlarging the
               profit-yielding (i.e., business) structure rather being a
               working or operating expense (see also paragraphs 111
               and 134 of this Ruling).
      (b)      The expenditure, rather than being for work done to
               restore the property by renewal or replacement of
               subsidiary parts of a whole, is for work that is a renewal in
               the sense of a reconstruction of the entirety (see paragraph
               114 of this Ruling for what is meant by an 'entirety'). The
               application of this distinction depends very much on what,
               in the circumstances of the case, is properly considered to
               be the relevant entirety (see also paragraph 115 of this
               Ruling).
                                                                  Taxation Ruling


                                                     TR 97/23
FOI status: may be released                                           page 9 of 52



      (c)    If property bought for use as a capital asset in the buyer's
             business is not in good order and suitable for use in the
             way intended, expenditure incurred in putting it in order
             suitable for use is part of the cost of its acquisition and is
             of a capital nature (see also paragraphs 59 to 66 and 125 to
             140 of this Ruling).
33. The cost of replacing things such as free-standing stoves,
refrigerators and furniture in premises used for income purposes is
capital expenditure and is not deductible under section 25-10. (Note,
however, that these items (if they are not permanent fixtures) are plant
on which depreciation is allowable: see Taxation Ruling IT 242.)
34. The cost of replacing items such as locks and exhaust fans,
which are permanent fixtures installed in premises used for income
purposes, is deductible as a repair under section 25-10 provided it is a
replacement of a worn out unit by a new unit of a similar design that
simply restores its efficiency of function and is not an improvement:
see Case S27 (1966) 17 TBRD 163; (1966) 13 CTBR (NS) Case 56.


No deduction for 'notional' repairs
35. If work done goes beyond 'repair' and the whole cost is capital
expenditure, no amount is allowable as a deduction under section
25-10 for 'notional' repairs, i.e., an amount it is estimated that repair
work would have cost the taxpayer if the property had in fact merely
been repaired (but see paragraphs 55 to 57 of this Ruling for the
deductibility of repairs carried out at the same time as an
improvement, and paragraphs 63 to 66 and 136 to 140 of this Ruling
for dissecting or apportioning initial repair costs).


Distinction between repair and either renewal or reconstruction -
what is meant by the 'entirety'
(Note: see explanations at paragraphs 113 to 119 and examples at paragraphs 165 to
170 of this Ruling)


Repair is distinct from renewal or reconstruction
36. Repair is restoration by renewal or replacement of subsidiary
parts of a whole. Renewal or reconstruction, as distinguished from
repair, is restoration of the entirety.


What is an 'entirety'?
37. The term 'entirety' is used by the courts in repair cases to refer to
something 'separately identifiable as a principal item of capital
Taxation Ruling


TR 97/23
page 10 of 52                                         FOI status: may be released



equipment' (Lindsay v. FC of T (1960) 106 CLR 377 at 385; (1960)
12 ATD 197 at 201), 'a physical thing which satisfies a particular
notion' (the Lindsay case at 106 CLR 384; 12 ATD 201) and 'not
necessarily the whole but substantially the whole of the [property]
under discussion' (the Lindsay case at 106 CLR 383-4; 12 ATD 200).
There is no one correct test for what is a subsidiary part and what is an
entirety. Which approach to adopt depends on the facts in each
particular case and, even then, the question is one to be answered in
the light of all the circumstances it is reasonable to take into account
(see Regent Oil Co Ltd v. Strick Inspector of Taxes [1965] 3 All ER
174 at 179; Brown (Inspector of Taxes) v. Burnley Football and
Athletic Co Ltd [1980] 3 All ER 244 at 255).
38.   Property is more likely to be an entirety if:
      ·         the property is separately identifiable as a principal item of
                capital equipment; or
      ·         the thing or structure is an integral part, but only a part, of
                entire premises and is capable of providing a useful
                function without regard to any other part of the premises;
                or
      ·         the thing or structure is a separate and distinct item of
                plant in itself from the thing or structure which it serves;
                or
      ·         the thing or structure is a 'unit of property' as that
                expression is used in the depreciation deduction provisions
                of the income tax law.
39. Property is more likely to be a subsidiary part rather than an
entirety if:
      ·         it is an integral part of some larger item of plant; or
      ·         the property is physically, commercially and functionally
                an inseparable part of something else.
40. Examples of property that constitute an entirety are a slipway on
the business site of a slip proprietor and ship repairer (the Lindsay
case); a spectators' grandstand in a football stadium (the Burnley FC
case); a bridge giving access to the driveway of a garage (Case B21
(1951) 2 TBRD 101); a substantially new race track (Case D64 72
ATC 390; (1972) 18 CTBR (NS) Case 33); and a factory drainage
system comprising an underground system of concrete stormwater
drains (Case G5 (1955) 7 TBRD 29). Examples of property that do
not constitute an entirety are the insulation and lining for a cool room
(Case T14 (1968) 18 TBRD 67) and a window in a factory (even
though the window is totally restored). Something that is part of a
                                                           Taxation Ruling


                                                TR 97/23
FOI status: may be released                                  page 11 of 52



building, e.g., a roof or wall, is just that and no more. The building
itself is the entirety.
41. If a series of separate buildings collectively form and function as
a single industrial undertaking or commercial complex, we take the
view that each separate building in the undertaking or complex is an
entirety in itself. We do not accept that the whole undertaking or
complex is an entirety. As a result, the replacement of a complete
building is not regarded as replacement of a subsidiary part of an
entirety comprised of the undertaking or complex.
42. Work done to a part of a building, though not amounting to a
replacement or reconstruction of an entirety, may still be capital
expenditure and not deductible, for example, because it amounts to an
improvement: see (1953) 4 CTBR (NS) Case 9 and paragraphs 44 to
57 of this Ruling for the distinction between a repair and an
improvement.


Progressive restoration can involve deductible repairs
43. Although a reconstruction of the whole of property (e.g., fencing
or a railway) is not a deductible repair, a series of restorations of the
property could be undertaken over a period of time that progressively
restores subsidiary parts of the whole. The progressive restoration
would involve a series of deductible repair expenses. It is a question
of fact and degree whether the work is the reconstruction of an entirety
or a progressive restoration of subsidiary parts of the entirety over a
period of time. Relevant considerations in drawing the line of
demarcation here include:
      ·      the nature, scale and dimensions of the work in proportion
             to the nature, scale and dimensions of the property
             involved (the larger the work in comparison with the scale
             and dimensions of the property, the more likely a
             reconstruction of the entirety is involved);
      ·      the period of time over which the work is done (the shorter
             the period, the more likely a reconstruction of the entirety
             is involved); and
      ·      whether the work is done in accordance with an on-going
             program of restoration (more likely to constitute
             deductible repairs) or done in one operation (more likely to
             constitute a non-deductible reconstruction of the whole
             property).
Taxation Ruling


TR 97/23
page 12 of 52                                         FOI status: may be released



Distinction between a repair and an improvement
(Note: see explanations at paragraphs 120 to 124 and examples at paragraphs 172 to
176 of this Ruling)


Repair is distinct from improvement
44. The meaning of 'repair' or 'repairs' is considered in paragraphs 12
to 30 of this Ruling. In the case of a 'repair', broadly speaking, the
work restores the efficiency of function of the property without
changing its character. An 'improvement', on the other hand, provides
a greater efficiency of function in the property - usually in some
existing function. It involves bringing a thing or structure into a more
valuable or desirable form, state or condition than a mere repair would
do. Some factors that point to work done to property being an
improvement include whether the work will extend the property's
income producing ability, significantly enhance its saleability or
market value or extend the property's expected life.
45. To distinguish between a 'repair' and an 'improvement' to
property, one needs to consider the effect that the work done on the
property has on its efficiency of function. This is the determinative
test.
46. If the work entails the replacement or restoration of some
defective, damaged or deteriorated part of the property, one does not
focus on the effect the work has on the efficiency of function of the
part. That is not determinative of whether the property is repaired or
improved. It is a relevant factor to take into account, however, in
considering the effect of the work on the property's efficiency of
function. It is possible, for instance, that the replacement of a
subsidiary part of property with a part better in some ways than the
original is a repair to the property without the work being an
improvement to the property.
47. Replacement or substantial reconstruction of the entirety, as
distinct from the subsidiary parts of the whole, is an improvement.


Use of different materials
48. If expenditure is incurred in replacing or renewing a part of
property with a material of a different type from the original, the work
done may either repair the property, or be an improvement to it. The
use of different materials is not in itself determinative of the issue.
49. Whether the use of a more modern material to replace the
original material qualifies as a repair is a question determined on the
facts of each case. It is restoration of a thing's efficiency of function
                                                            Taxation Ruling


                                                 TR 97/23
FOI status: may be released                                   page 13 of 52



(without changing its character) rather than exact repetition of form or
material that is significant.
50. If the work done restores a previous function to the property, or
restores the efficiency of the previous function, it does not matter that
a different material is used. Even if the work done using different
material enables the property to perform its function marginally more
efficiently, the work may still constitute a deductible repair. However,
the greater the work enhances the efficient functioning of the property,
the more likely it is that the work constitutes an improvement.
51. The test is whether there is a sufficient degree of improvement
to justify characterising the expenditure as capital and therefore
excluding it from deductibility under section 25-10.
52. If the work produces a new and different function, or an
additional function, it is likely to constitute a capital improvement.


Technological advances or enhancements
53. As a general proposition, the greater the degree of technological
advancement involved in work done to property, the more it is likely
the work goes beyond a 'repair'. This is so because it is more likely the
work does more than restore the property to its original efficiency of
function. If it does, the cost of the work is not deductible under
section 25-10. (It might be deductible under section 8-1 if the cost is a
working or operating expense and it is not of a capital nature.)
54.   If, however:
      (a)    the work done to property involves:
             (i)    a degree of technological advancement that results in
                    only a minor and incidental improvement to the
                    property; or
             (ii)   an enhancement arising from the use of more
                    modern materials and component parts (often where
                    original materials and parts are no longer available)
                    that adds in only a minor and incidental way to the
                    overall efficiency of function of the property; and
      (b)    the work done does not change the property's character;
this does not in itself preclude the expenditure from being
characterised as repair expenditure deductible under section 25-10.


Repairs done at the same time as improvements
55. The character of a repair does not necessarily change because it
is carried out at the same time as an improvement. If, for example, a
Taxation Ruling


TR 97/23
page 14 of 52                                         FOI status: may be released



shopping centre is extensively renovated or restored (the project
combining repairs and improvements) and if some parts of the project
can be effectively separated and considered in isolation from the rest
of the project, they may still be repairs. It is necessary to examine
separately the individual parts of the total project to determine whether
any part, if considered in isolation, is a repair. It is not appropriate to
have regard only to the result of the entire work done. It is
inappropriate to regard the whole project as an affair of capital. In
other words, if individual parts of the total project can be separated
and characterised as repairs, and if their cost can be segregated and
accurately quantified, their cost is deductible. It must be possible to
segregate the cost of the repairs actually effected from the capital cost
of the improvements.
56. If, however, repair work is inextricably bound up with work of
an improvement nature, and the repair work cannot be separately
segregated and its cost accurately quantified independently from the
cost of the improvements, we regard the cost of the entire work as
being of a capital nature and not deductible.
57. For example, if work normally regarded as a repair, such as
painting, is done to property as part of, or in conjunction with, a
reconstruction and modernisation of the property, and it cannot be
segregated and its cost separately quantified, it may not be deductible.
It is again a question of fact and degree.
58. Expenditure on 'notional' repairs is not deductible; see paragraph
35 of this Ruling.


Expenditure to remedy defects, damage or deterioration in
existence at the date of acquisition (initial repairs)
(Note: see explanations at paragraphs 125 to 140 and examples at paragraphs 177 to
179 of this Ruling)


Initial repairs are of a capital nature and not deductible
59. Expenditure incurred on an initial repair after property is
acquired, if the expenditure is incurred in remedying defects, damage
or deterioration in existence at the date of acquisition, is capital
expenditure and is not, therefore, deductible under section 25-10. This
is so whether the property is purchased or obtained under lease or
licence by the taxpayer. The cost of effecting an initial repair is still
not deductible even if some income happens to be earned after
acquisition but before the repair expenditure is incurred: but see
paragraphs 63 to 66 of this Ruling in relation to dissecting or
apportioning initial repair costs.
                                                             Taxation Ruling


                                                 TR 97/23
FOI status: may be released                                    page 15 of 52



60. The main consideration in relation to initial repairs is the
appearance, form, state and condition of the property and its functional
efficiency when it is acquired. Expenditure that remedies some defect
or damage to, or deterioration of, property is capital expenditure if the
defect, damage or deterioration:
      (a)    existed at the time of acquisition of the property; and
      (b)    did not arise from the operations of the person who incurs
             the expenditure.
61. It is immaterial whether at the time of acquisition the taxpayer
was aware of the condition of the property, including its need for
repair. It is also immaterial whether the purchase price (or lease
rentals) reflected the need for repairs. We consider that the English
Court of Appeal decision in Odeon Associated Theatres Ltd v. Jones
(Inspector of Taxes) [1972] 1 All ER 681 is not authority in Australia
for a contrary view. An initial repair expense is not the type of repair
expenditure ordinarily incurred as a working or operating expense in
producing assessable income or in carrying on a business. This is
because it lacks a connection with the conduct or operations of the
taxpayer that produce the taxpayer's assessable income. It is
essentially an additional cost of acquiring the property or an
improvement in the quality of the property acquired. Initial repair
expenditure relates to the establishment of the profit - yielding
structure. It is capital expenditure and is not deductible under section
25-10.


Initial repairs to property obtained by lease or licence
62. If property is obtained under lease or licence (rather than
purchased) and is, or is to be, held, etc., for income purposes,
expenditure on 'initial repairs' is capital expenditure. Expenditure for
initial repairs after property is obtained under lease or licence is
therefore not deductible under section 25-10.


Initial repair costs can be dissected or apportioned
63. An initial repair expense can be dissected or apportioned to
allow a deduction under section 25-10 of any part of the expense that
remedies deterioration arising from the holding, etc., of the property
by the taxpayer for income purposes after it was acquired. No
dissection or apportionment is available, however, if the repair
expenditure is necessitated by a defect or damage to property because
this expenditure is either wholly attributable to the holding, etc., of the
property before the taxpayer acquired it or wholly attributable to the
Taxation Ruling


TR 97/23
page 16 of 52                                        FOI status: may be released



holding, etc., of the property by the taxpayer for income purposes after
it was acquired.
64. Dissection or apportionment on a time basis is appropriate if
repair costs are incurred either due to defects (whether expected or
unexpected) that arise gradually over an extended period or due to
wear and tear or deterioration that occurs:
      (a)       in part before the property is acquired by a taxpayer; and
      (b)       in part in the course of the taxpayer's holding, etc., of the
                property for income purposes.
65. This dissection may be done either in the year of income the
property is acquired if the initial repair expenditure is incurred in that
year or in a later year in which the expenditure is incurred.
66. If repair costs are attributable either to damage before property is
acquired by a taxpayer, or to defects that emerged suddenly and
matured by the time of acquisition of the property, no deduction is
allowable under section 25-10 in accordance with paragraph 59 of this
Ruling. If repair costs are attributable either to damage that occurs
during the taxpayer's holding, etc., of the property for income purposes
or to defects that emerge suddenly and mature during that time, a
deduction is allowable if the other general principles stated in this
Ruling are satisfied.


Some specific issues in construing section 25-10
(Note: see explanations at paragraphs 141 to 144 and examples at paragraphs 180
and 181 of this Ruling)
Expenditure incurred by a taxpayer on repairs to property that the
taxpayer does not own
67. A taxpayer is entitled to a deduction under section 25-10 for
expenditure for repairs to property he or she holds, etc., for income
purposes, even though the taxpayer does not own the property. The
test is whether the taxpayer held or used the property as required, not
that the taxpayer owned the property.
68. A lessee of business premises, for example, is entitled to a
deduction under section 25-10 for repair expenditure incurred in a year
of income during the term of the lease if the lessee held, etc., the
premises for income purposes when the expenditure is incurred. This
is so even though the lessee does not own the premises and even if the
year of income is the year that the lease expires, provided that, when
the repair expenditure is incurred, the lessee held, etc., the premises
for income purposes. A deduction is also allowable if a licence to use
the business premises is granted to the taxpayer rather than a lease of
the premises.
                                                           Taxation Ruling


                                                TR 97/23
FOI status: may be released                                  page 17 of 52



69. No deduction under section 25-10 is allowable to a real estate
agent who incurs repair expenditure on a rental property on the agent's
list. This is because a real estate agent does not hold, occupy or use a
rental property for the purpose of producing assessable income or in
carrying on business for that purpose. It is the owner or lessor of a
rental property who holds or uses it for income purposes.
70. The deductibility under section 8-1 of costs incurred by a real
estate industry employee on such things as replacing a cracked
window and repairs to door locks in presenting a property for sale is
considered in Taxation Ruling TR 95/21. Paragraphs 22 and 172 to
174 of TR 95/21 state that these costs are not deductible under
subsection 51(1) of the ITAA 1936 because they are not incurred in
deriving the employee's income. Rather, they are incurred in deriving
the employer's income.


Expenditure for repairs must be 'incurred'
71. There need be no legal obligation on the taxpayer to undertake
repairs for the taxpayer to be entitled to a deduction. Expenditure for
the repairs must be 'incurred' by the taxpayer in the year of income in
which the deduction is claimed. The word 'incur' in section 25-10 has
the same meaning as the word 'incurred' in section 8-1.


Property must be held or used bone fide for income purposes
72. You can deduct repair expenditure if, when you incurred the
expenditure, you held or used the property bona fide for income
purposes. We say 'bona fide' here because some arrangements may
not result in an allowable deduction. For instance, a taxpayer's
beachside apartment may have deteriorated over several years due to
wear and tear arising from its use for private purposes. If the taxpayer
arranges to 'rent' the apartment to his or her adult child for, say, a
month and during that month incurs expenditure to repair and paint the
apartment, a deduction may not be allowable, in our view, under
section 25-10 for the repair and painting costs. We would take the
view in appropriate circumstances that no deduction is allowable
either because:
      (a)    the apartment is not held, etc., for income purposes; or
      (b)    Part IVA of the ITAA 1936, may apply to the arrangement.
Taxation Ruling


TR 97/23
page 18 of 52                                         FOI status: may be released



Expenditure for repairs after property is held, etc., for income
purposes but before income is actually derived
73. A deduction is allowable under section 25-10 for repair
expenditure incurred in a year of income after property is first held,
etc., for income purposes but before income is actually derived from
the property, provided the repairs are not initial repairs. For example,
a rental property may be vacant but be advertised as being available
for rental. Before a tenant occupies the property, storm damage or an
accidental breakage occurs. Expenditure incurred to repair the damage
or breakage is deductible under section 25-10 because the property is
held, etc., for income purposes.


Scope of repair deduction provision and general deduction provision
74. Generally speaking, section 8-1 produces the same result as
section 25-10 in relation to the deductibility of repair costs. Section
8-1 has its own tests for deductibility. There may be occasions,
however, where section 8-1 allows a deduction for repair expenditure
that would otherwise not be deductible under section 25-10. Section
8-1 might allow a deduction, for example, after a taxpayer ceases to
hold, etc., property for income purposes even though section 25-10
would not allow a deduction (see Placer Pacific Management Pty Ltd
v FC of T 95 ATC 4459; (1995) 31 ATR 253).


Expenditure for repairs before property is held, etc., for income
purposes
(Note: see explanations at paragraph 145 and example at paragraph 182 of this
Ruling)
75. Repair expenditure incurred in a year of income before property
is held, etc., for income purposes is not deductible under section 25-
10.


Expenditure for repairs to property previously used by the
taxpayer for non-income producing purposes
(Note: see explanations at paragraph 146 and examples at paragraphs 183 and 184
of this Ruling)
76. In appropriate circumstances, expenditure for repairs can qualify
as a deduction even though the property has previously been held, etc.,
by the taxpayer for non-income purposes. This situation is different
from an initial repair done to newly purchased or newly leased
property, where the repair expenditure is capital expenditure.
                                                                  Taxation Ruling


                                                     TR 97/23
FOI status: may be released                                         page 19 of 52



77. A deduction is allowable under section 25-10 if, when the repair
expenditure is incurred in a year of income, the property is held, etc.,
by a taxpayer for income purposes:
       (a)   even though the property has previously been held, etc., by
             the taxpayer for non-income purposes; and
       (b) even though some or all of the defects, damage or
           deterioration arise from, or are attributable to, the
           taxpayer's holding, etc., of the property before its holding,
           etc., for income purposes; and
       (c)   provided that the repair expenditure is not capital
             expenditure.


Expenditure for repairs to property used for the purpose of
providing non-deductible entertainment
(Note: see explanations at paragraphs 147 to 150 and example at paragraph 185 of
this Ruling)
78. Deductions otherwise allowable under section 25-10 or under
section 8-1 for repairs to property are reduced to the extent that the
property, when the expenditure is incurred, is used by a taxpayer for
the purpose of providing, or in connection with providing,
entertainment that is made non-deductible by section 32-15 of the
ITAA 1997 (or the former section 51AE of the ITAA 1936). The
deduction is wholly denied if the property is used solely for non-
deductible entertainment. If the property is used to provide both
deductible and non-deductible entertainment, the deduction is
proportionately reduced to the extent that the property is used for non-
deductible entertainment.


Expenditure for repairs to property used only partly for income
producing purposes during a year of income
(Note: see explanations at paragraphs 151 to 161 and examples at paragraphs 186
and 187 of this Ruling)
79. If property is held, etc., in a year of income partly for income
purposes and partly for non-income purposes, repair expenditure is
only deductible to the extent that is reasonable in the circumstances of
the case. The reasonableness test is an objective one and each case
must be decided on its own merits. However, we would expect that
the amount of expenditure allowable as a deduction under subsection
25-10(2) (or the old law, when read with subsection 53(3)) would
ordinarily be calculated by reference to the extent to which the
property was held, etc., in the year of income for income purposes.
Taxation Ruling


TR 97/23
page 20 of 52                                         FOI status: may be released




Date of effect
80. Subject to paragraphs 81 and 82, this Ruling applies to years
commencing both before and after its date of issue. However, the
Ruling does not apply to taxpayers to the extent that it conflicts with
the terms of a settlement of a dispute agreed to before the date of issue
of the Ruling (see paragraphs 21 and 22 of Taxation Ruling
TR 92/20).
81. Paragraphs 26 to 30 of this Ruling (expenditure to control health
risks from dangerous substances) may be less favourable in some
circumstances than Taxation Ruling IT 2183. It is less favourable
because IT 2183, broadly stated, accepted as deductible repair work
done in controlling health risks associated with the use of asbestos in
income producing buildings. Paragraphs 26 to 30 only have a future
application. They only apply to expenditure incurred after the date of
this Ruling.
82. Paragraphs 63 to 66 of this Ruling (initial repair costs can be
dissected or apportioned) are more favourable to taxpayers than the
Commissioner's earlier practice of denying any dissection or
apportionment. Paragraphs 63 to 66 have both a past and future
application, subject to the statutory limits of section 170 of the ITAA
1936.


Explanations
Meaning of the word 'repairs'
(Note: see ruling at paragraphs 12 to 30 and examples at paragraphs 162 and 163 of
this Ruling)


Ordinary meaning of the word 'repairs' in its context in section
25-10
83. The word 'repairs' is not defined in the Act. In its context in
section 25-10, the word 'repairs' bears its ordinary meaning.
According to The Shorter Oxford English Dictionary, 'repair' means:
      'Restoration of some material thing or structure by the renewal
      of decayed or worn out parts, by refixing what has become loose
      or detached; the result of this.'
84.   Osborn's Concise Law Dictionary, 8th ed, defines 'repair' as:
      'The making good of defects in a property which has deteriorated
      from its original state. The work required may involve curing
      defects arising from the defective design or construction of the
                                                            Taxation Ruling


                                                TR 97/23
FOI status: may be released                                   page 21 of 52



      building, but it must fall short of effectively reconstructing the
      premises or improving them.'
85. Many judicial decisions make it plain that 'repair' involves the
making good of defects, damage or deterioration including the renewal
of parts and that the word does not imply a total reconstruction: see
Stroud's Judicial Dictionary. In BP Oil Refinery (Bulwer Island) Ltd
v. FC of T 92 ATC 4031 at 4039; (1992) 23 ATR 65 at 73, the
Federal Court of Australia (Jenkinson J) expressed the opinion that
'work will not be considered repair unless it includes some restoration
of something lost or damaged, whether function or substance or some
other quality or characteristic'.
86. Repair, as the word is commonly understood, does not depend
on whether much is done or only a little. Lord Macnaghten said in the
House of Lords decision in Hoddinott v. Newton, Chambers & Co Ltd
[1901] AC 49 at 54:
      'A man does not usually wait to repair his house until it is
      altogether ruinous and on the point of falling to pieces.'
87. What is a 'repair' for the purposes of section 25-10 is a question
of fact and degree in each case having regard to the form, state and
condition of the particular property and its functional efficiency when
the expenditure is incurred (per Buckley LJ in Lurcott v. Wakely &
Wheeler [1911] 1 KB 905 at 924) and to the nature and extent of the
work done. 'Repair' may involve renewal or replacement of subsidiary
parts to some degree and may involve improvement but only to a
minor and incidental extent.


Restoration of efficiency of function of the property
88. The High Court of Australia (Windeyer J) said in W Thomas &
Co Pty Ltd v. FC of T (1965) 115 CLR 58 at 72; (1965) 14 ATD 78
at 87:
      'The words "repair" and "improvement" may for some purposes
      connote contrasting concepts; but obviously repairing a thing
      improves the condition it was in immediately before repair. It
      may sometimes be convenient for some purposes to contrast a
      "repair" with a "replacement" or a "renewal". But repairs to a
      whole are often made by the replacement of worn-out parts by
      new parts. Repair involves a restoration of a thing to a
      condition it formerly had without changing its character.
      But in the case of a thing considered from the point of view
      of its use as distinct from its appearance, it is restoration of
      efficiency of function rather than exact repetition of form or
      material that is significant. Whether or not work done upon a
Taxation Ruling


TR 97/23
page 22 of 52                                    FOI status: may be released



      thing is aptly described as a repair of that thing is thus a question
      of fact and degree.' (emphasis added)
89. It is therefore more significant in applying the word 'repairs' in
its context in section 25-10, to consider whether the work restores the
efficiency of function of the property for income purposes (without
changing its character) than it is to consider whether the appearance,
form, state or condition of the property is exactly restored.


Functionality of the property on which the work is done
90. In considering whether work does more than restore property to
its original efficiency of function, what is determinative is the
functionality of the property on which the work is being done and not
the functionality of the defective component or part. That is not to
say, however, that the effect of the work on the functionality of the
defective component or part is not relevant. It is a relevant factor to
take into account in considering the extent of change made to the
functionality of the property.
91. To illustrate, if cast-iron pistons in an engine are replaced with
aluminium-alloy pistons, being a more modern material for the
construction of pistons, the determining question is whether the
functionality of the engine has been restored or has only been
enhanced in a minor and incidental way. However, any greater
efficiency of function of the pistons is a relevant consideration in
deciding that question. Expenditure in replacing the pistons is
deductible under section 25-10. The engine's essential efficiency of
function has not changed. Nor has the character of the engine changed
by the use of marginally more efficient pistons. The aluminium-alloy
pistons are marginally more efficient because they are lighter, hardier
and are machined differently to produce less friction.


Maintenance work - whether 'repair'
92. Maintenance, as generally understood, includes the prevention of
defects, damage or deterioration; a common example is the regular re-
painting of business premises. The word 'maintenance' may in some
contexts be the same as 'repair', and it may in some contexts have a
wider meaning that includes repairing as well as other operations.
Some kinds of maintenance work constitute 'repairs' in its context in
section 25-10, for example, painting plant or business premises to
rectify existing deterioration and to prevent further deterioration.
Maintenance done to property that is not in need of repair, however, is
not repair work and any expenditure for the work in these
circumstances is not deductible under section 25-10.
                                                            Taxation Ruling


                                                TR 97/23
FOI status: may be released                                   page 23 of 52



93. In Day v. Harland and Wolff [1953] 2 All ER 387 Pearson J
observed at 388:
      'So, very broadly speaking, I think that to repair is to remedy
      defects, but it can also properly include an element of the "stitch
      in time which saves nine". Work does not cease to be repair
      work because it is done to a large extent in anticipation of
      forthcoming defects or in rectification of merely incipient
      defects, rather than the rectification of defects which have
      already become serious. Some element of anticipation is
      included.' (emphasis added)
94. His Honour's statement, by necessary implication, indicates that
work done that is only in anticipation of forthcoming defects or
deterioration does in fact cease to be repair work. Work done in
anticipation of forthcoming defects or deterioration can be considered
a 'repair' if it is done in combination with work of rectification: see
the BP Oil Refinery (Bulwer Island) Ltd case at 92 ATC 4039; 23
ATR 73.
95. Oiling, brushing or cleaning something that is otherwise in good
working condition and only requires attention to prevent the
possibility of its going wrong in the future, is not 'repairs' in terms of
section 25-10: compare London & North Eastern Ry. Co. v. Berriman
[1946] 1 All ER 255 at 267 and the BP Oil Refinery (Bulwer Island)
Ltd case. (The cost of these operations may be deductible under
section 8-1.)


Work done to meet requirements of regulatory bodies
96. To constitute a 'repair' for the purposes of section 25-10, work
done to meet requirements of regulatory bodies must satisfy the
general principles and the various factors discussed in this Ruling.
Work done to repair property that also happens to meet the
requirements of regulatory bodies is deductible under the section.
However, work done solely to meet requirements of regulatory bodies
is not a 'repair' for the purposes of the section.
97. A 'repair' for the purposes of section 25-10 is, fundamentally,
work done to remedy or restore a defect in, damage to, or deterioration
of, property in a mechanical or physical sense.
98. We take the view that 'repair' does not extend to a removal of
any impediment to the holding, etc., of property for income purposes
arising solely from regulatory requirements. This is clearly
demonstrable if the property is otherwise functioning (in a mechanical
or physical sense) as intended and, in that sense, is not in a state of
disrepair.
Taxation Ruling


TR 97/23
page 24 of 52                                   FOI status: may be released



99. If Government regulations, for instance, require something to be
added to property (e.g., an automatic sprinkler system to a building or
an air bag to a motor vehicle), work done to comply with this
requirement does not constitute a repair because it is not work done to
remedy or make good any defect, damage or deterioration in a
mechanical or physical sense. In any event, this is likely to involve
capital expenditure and be excluded from section 25-10.


Alternative view
100. We acknowledge that an alternative view exists whether work
done to meet regulatory requirements constitutes a 'repair' under the
terms of section 25-10.
101. If a regulatory body imposes a requirement to do work to
property (say, a requirement relating to health, safety or for some other
social utilitarian purpose), proponents of this view contend that, until
the work is done, this is an impediment or defect in the property that
can necessitate a 'repair' in terms of section 25-10.
102. The regulatory requirement, on this view, is arguably an
impediment or defect in the efficient functioning of the property, and
thus, in the holding, etc., of the property for income purposes. In an
extreme case, non-compliance with the requirement may even require
income producing activities to cease. This view advocates that
expenditure to remedy the impediment is deductible under section
25-10.
103. If Government regulations, for instance, require that work be
done to property to control health risks associated with the use of
dangerous substances (such as asbestos, CFCs, chromium, dioxins,
cyanide, pesticides and arsenic), the work done could qualify, on this
view, as a 'repair' for the purposes of section 25-10.
104. We do not accept the correctness of this alternative view. As
stated earlier, we take the view that removing an impediment to the
holding, etc., of property for income purposes arising from regulatory
requirements does not constitute 'repair' of a defect in, damage to, or
deterioration of the property in the context required by section 25-10.


Technological advances or enhancements
105. In many a repair process, there is some improvement made to
property as a result of technological advancements or more modern
materials and component parts becoming available. The extent of this
improvement is crucial in making a judgment about the deductibility
of repair expenditure under section 25-10.
                                                                    Taxation Ruling


                                                       TR 97/23
FOI status: may be released                                           page 25 of 52



106. As a general proposition, the greater the degree of:
       (a)    technological advancement; or
       (b)    enhancement arising due to the use of more modern
              materials and component parts;
involved in the work done to property, the more likely it is that the
work involves an improvement or a change in the character of the
property rather than a repair.
107. If, however, only minor and incidental improvement is made to
the overall efficiency of function of property as a result of
technological advancement, or by reason of enhancements due to the
use of more modern materials and component parts in the work done
to the property, the repair expenditure remains deductible under
section 25-10.


In what situations is repair expenditure of a capital nature?
(Note: see ruling at paragraphs 31 to 35 and example at paragraph 164 of this
Ruling)
108. Subsection 25-10(3) excludes capital expenditure from being a
deduction. Under the old law, expenditure of a capital nature was also
excluded.
109. Two of the leading Australian cases on determining whether
expenditure for repairs is of a capital nature are FC of T v. Western
Suburbs Cinemas Ltd (1952) 86 CLR 102; (1952) 9 ATD 452 and the
Lindsay case (affirmed on appeal at (1961) 106 CLR 377; 12 ATD
505).
110. In the Western Suburbs Cinemas case, the ceiling of a motion
picture theatre was in a state of disrepair. To restore the ceiling to its
original condition would have cost £603. The company instead
replaced the ceiling with a new one of a different design and better
material for a cost of more than £3,000. The High Court (Kitto J)
concluded that the new ceiling was an improvement to a fixed capital
asset and that its cost was a capital charge. His Honour said at 86
CLR 105; 9 ATD 454:
       'To decide whether a particular item of expenditure on business
       premises ought to be charged to capital or revenue account is apt
       to be a matter of difficulty, though the difference between the
       two accounts is clear enough as a matter of general statement
       (Sun Newspapers Ltd v. Federal Commissioner of Taxation). In
       this case, the work done consisted of the replacement of the
       entire ceiling, a major and important part of the structure of the
       theatre, with a new and better ceiling. The operation seems to
       me different, not only in degree, but in kind, from the type of
Taxation Ruling


TR 97/23
page 26 of 52                                    FOI status: may be released



      repairs which are properly allowed for in the working expenses
      of a theatre business. It did much more than meet a need for
      restoration; it provided a ceiling having considerable advantages
      over the old one, including the advantage that it reduced the
      likelihood of repair bills in the future ... . The truth is, I think,
      that the new ceiling was an improvement to a fixed capital asset
      and that its cost was a capital charge.'
111. In Lindsay v. FC of T (1960) 106 CLR 197; 12 ATD 505, the
High Court (Kitto J) held that expenditure incurred to renew a slipway
was a renewal of an entirety and not a deductible repair. His Honour
said at 106 CLR 383; 12 ATD 200:
      'If the work done in respect of the slipway is correctly described
      as repairs, it cannot, I think, on the facts of this case, be of a
      capital nature. The problem is to characterize the expenditure
      according to the familiar distinction between repair, in the sense
      of restoration by renewal or replacement of subsidiary parts of a
      whole, and renewal in the sense of reconstruction of the entirety,
      meaning by the entirety not necessarily the whole but
      substantially the whole of the subject matter under discussion:
      per Buckley L.J., in Lurcott v. Wakely & Wheeler; Rhodesia
      Railways v. Collector of Income Tax, Bechuanaland'.
      In order to determine whether an item of expenditure is to be
      held on general principles to be chargeable to income or capital
      account, it is of course necessary to distinguish between "the
      business entity, structure or organization set up or established for
      the earning of profit and the process by which such an
      organization operates to obtain regular returns by means of
      regular outlay" ... : Sun Newspapers Ltd and Associated
      Newspapers Ltd. v. Federal Commissioner of Taxation [(1938)
      61 CLR 337 at pp 359, 360]. But where the question is whether
      expenditure has been for repairs, and for the purpose of deciding
      that question one asks what is the entirety which it is relevant to
      consider, one is looking not for a profit-earning structure or
      entity, as such, but for a physical thing which satisfies a
      particular notion.'


No deduction for notional repairs
112. In the Western Suburbs Cinemas case, Kitto J rejected an
argument that, where an actual expenditure is not an allowable
deduction, a notional expenditure may be. His Honour said at 86 CLR
107; 9 ATD 455:
      ' ... when a taxpayer has two courses open to him, one involving
      an expenditure which will be an allowable deduction for income
                                                                   Taxation Ruling


                                                      TR 97/23
FOI status: may be released                                          page 27 of 52



      tax and the other involving an expenditure which will not be an
      allowable deduction, and for his own reasons he chooses the
      second course, he cannot have his income tax assessed as if he
      had exercised his choice in the opposite way. Section 53 is
      concerned with expenditure which was in fact incurred, not with
      expenditure which could have been incurred but was not.'


Distinction between repair and either renewal or reconstruction -
what is meant by the 'entirety'
(Note: see ruling at paragraphs 36 to 43 and examples at paragraphs 165 to 170 of
this Ruling)
Repair is distinct from renewal or replacement
113. Repairs to property may involve renewal or replacement of a
subordinate part of the property. As Buckley LJ said in Lurcott v.
Wakely & Wheeler [1911] 1 KB 905 at 924:
      'Repair is restoration by renewal or replacement of subsidiary
      parts of a whole. Renewal, as distinguished from repair, is
      reconstruction of the entirety, meaning by the entirety not
      necessarily the whole but substantially the whole subject-matter
      under discussion ... the question of repair is in every case one of
      degree, and the test is whether the act to be done is one which in
      substance is the renewal or replacement of defective parts, or the
      renewal or replacement of substantially the whole.'
114. Renewal, replacement or reconstruction of the entirety (i.e., the
whole or substantially the whole) of a thing or structure is an
improvement rather than a deductible repair.


What is an entirety?
115. The tests used by the courts and tribunals or suggested by
commentators to identify an entirety - as distinct from a subsidiary part
- include one or more of the following:
      ·      is the property (e.g., a chimney) physically, commercially
             and functionally an inseparable part of an entirety (e.g., a
             factory)?: Samuel Jones & Co (Devondale) Ltd v.
             Commissioners of Inland Revenue (1951) 32 TC 513.
      ·      is the property (e.g., a slipway) separately identifiable as a
             principal item of capital equipment?: Lindsay's case.
      ·      is the thing or structure (e.g., a timber staircase) an integral
             part, but only a part, of the entire premises and is it
             capable of providing a useful function without regard to
Taxation Ruling


TR 97/23
page 28 of 52                                        FOI status: may be released



                any other part of the premises?: Case W68 89 ATC 613;
                AAT Case 5232 (1989) 20 ATR 3796.
      ·         is the thing or structure (e.g., meters and pumping plant) a
                separate and distinct item of plant in itself from the thing
                or structure (e.g., a light and power station) to which it
                supplied something (e.g., electric light and power) or an
                integral part of some larger item of plant?: Case 36
                (1949) 15 TBRD (OS) 287.
      ·         is the property a 'unit of property' as that expression is used
                in the depreciation provisions of the income tax law,
                bearing in mind that, to be such a 'unit', the thing or
                structure must be 'functionally separate and independent'?:
                Ready Mixed Concrete (Victoria) Pty Ltd v. FC of T
                (1969) 118 CLR 177; (1969) 15 ATD 215.
116. The leading Australian case in this area is the High Court
decision in the Lindsay case where slip proprietors and ship repairers
reconstructed one of two slipways. The taxpayers submitted that the
relevant entirety was the whole of the business premises on which the
slipway existed or, alternatively, the whole of the slip (comprising the
slipway, the hauling machinery that served it, the cradle on it and the
dolphins and warping winches by which vessels were manoeuvred on
to it). Kitto J rejected a submission that the slipway was only a
subsidiary part of some larger thing or aggregation of things. His
Honour held that the expenditure involved was not deductible under
section 53 of the ITAA 1936 because the slipway ought to be
considered as an entirety by itself (at 106 CLR 385; 12 ATD 201):
      'It is separately identifiable as a principal, and indeed the
      principal, item of capital equipment, so that in a discussion as to
      whether work done in relation to it constitutes a repair or a
      renewal in the opposed senses abovementioned, the subject
      matter in relation to which the choice of description is to be
      made is the slipway itself, and not any larger thing or
      aggregation of things of which it may be suggested to form part.'
117. In the W Thomas & Co case, where the High Court considered
deductions claimed for repairs to guttering, the roof, walls and two
floors of a building, the view was taken that the whole building was
the entirety. Windeyer J said (at 115 CLR 66; 14 ATD 83) that the
relevant question is not:
      ' ... whether the roof or the floor or some other part of the
      building, looked at by itself, was repaired as distinct from being
      reconstructed or replaced. It is whether what was done to the
      roof or the floor or some other part was a repair of the building.'
                                                                   Taxation Ruling


                                                      TR 97/23
FOI status: may be released                                          page 29 of 52



118. In other examples, the floor of a house (Lister v. Lane & Nesham
[1893] 2 QB 212) and the front external wall of a house (the Lurcott
case) have each been held to be a subsidiary part of the whole.


Progressive restoration can involve deductible repairs
119. It is a question of fact and degree whether a reconstruction is
undertaken of the whole property (not deductible) or a series of
restorations is embarked on over a period of time, progressively
restoring subsidiary parts of the whole (deductible). In the Lindsay
case, the expenditure on the slipway was regarded as a non-deductible
expense for the reconstruction of an entirety. The expenditure would
not become deductible by apportioning it into parts referable to
different sections of the slipway. By contrast, in The Rhodesia
Railways Ltd and Others v. Commissioner of Taxes (Southern
Rhodesia) [1925] 1 SAf TC 133 the restoration of sections of a
railway track was held not to be the reconstruction of an entirety.


Distinction between a repair and an improvement
(Note: see ruling at paragraphs 44 to 57 and examples at paragraphs 172 to 176 of
this Ruling)
120. An important question in distinguishing between a repair and an
improvement is whether expenditure incurred in replacing or renewing
a part of property with a material of a different type from the original
is a repair of the property or an improvement to it.
121. The material used does not have to be exactly the same as the
original material for the work to be a repair. Similarly, the use of
different material, whether it happens to be cheaper or more expensive
than the original material being replaced, does not necessarily rule out
the work being a repair.
122. It needs to be borne in mind that repairing property to some
extent improves the condition it was in immediately before repair.
Whether the use of a more modern material to replace the original
material qualifies as a repair is a question determined on the facts of
each case.
123. What is determinative of deductibility under section 25-10, if
different material is used, is whether the work done restores the
efficiency of function of the property (without changing its character),
not whether the same material as the original is used. We accept that
use of different material may result in a minor and incidental degree of
improvement in the property but still only restore the efficiency of
function of the property. If the degree of improvement is more than
Taxation Ruling


TR 97/23
page 30 of 52                                         FOI status: may be released



minor and incidental, the expenditure is of a capital nature and not
deductible under section 25-10.
124. Relevant considerations, consistently with the approach taken by
the High Court in the W Thomas & Co case and the Western Suburbs
Cinemas case, in distinguishing generally between a repair and an
improvement, are:
      (a)       whether or not the thing replaced or renewed was a major
                and important part of the structure of the property (at 86
                CLR 106; 9 ATD 454);
      (b)       whether the work performed did more than meet the need
                for restoration of efficiency of function (at 86 CLR 106; 9
                ATD 454 and at 115 CLR 72; 14 ATD 87), bearing in
                mind that 'repair' involves a restoration of a thing to a
                condition it formerly had without changing its character;
      (c)       whether the thing was replaced with a new and better one
                (at 86 CLR 106; 9 ATD 454); and
      (d)       whether the new thing has considerable advantages over
                the old one, including the advantage that it reduces the
                likelihood of repair bills in the future (at 86 CLR 106; 9
                ATD 454).


Expenditure to remedy defects, damage or deterioration in
existence at the date of acquisition (initial repairs)
(Note: see ruling at paragraphs 59 to 66 and examples at paragraphs 177 to 179 of
this Ruling)


Initial repairs are of a capital nature and not deductible
125. A repair after acquisition of property is an 'initial repair' if repair
was due when the property was acquired, in the sense that there was a
need for repair to restore or maintain the property's efficiency of
function. In other words, the property was neither in good order when
it was acquired nor suitable for use for income purposes in the way
intended.
126. The leading Australian case in this area is the High Court
decision in the Thomas case. There, Windeyer J held that the costs of
repairing a roof, guttering, wall, basement floor and wooden floor and
painting a building in the year of income it was acquired was
expenditure of a capital nature.
127. His Honour said (at 115 CLR 72; 14 ATD 87):
      'Expenditure upon repairs is properly attributable to revenue
      account when the repairs are for the maintenance of an income-
                                                           Taxation Ruling


                                               TR 97/23
FOI status: may be released                                  page 31 of 52



      producing capital asset. Maintenance involves the periodic
      repair of defects that are the result of normal wear and tear in
      operation. It is an expense of a revenue nature when it is to
      repair defects arising from the operations of the person who
      incurs it. But if when a thing is bought for use as a capital
      asset in the buyer's business it is not in good order and
      suitable for use in the way intended, the cost of putting it in
      order suitable for use is part of the cost of its acquisition, not
      a cost of its maintenance. The decision of the Court of Session
      in Law Shipping Co. Ltd. v. Inland Revenue Commissioners,
      [(1923) 12 TC 621] is commonly cited as authority for that
      proposition. The principle is obvious without the need for any
      supporting authority.' (emphasis added)
128. His Honour made it clear that it is immaterial whether the
taxpayer knew of the defects or whether the purchase price was
affected by them. Windeyer J said (at 115 CLR 74; 14 ATD 88):
      'It seems to me immaterial that when the taxpayer acquired the
      building it did not know of some of its defects ... . That means
      only that the cost of obtaining an asset suitable for its purpose
      was greater than had been expected.'
129. In the Law Shipping Co case, the taxpayer in December 1919
bought for £97,000 a steamship ready to sail and with freight booked
and loaded. As the periodical Lloyd's survey was then considerably
overdue, an exemption from survey had been obtained for the voyage
about to commence. On return from the voyage in May 1920, the ship
underwent survey and the taxpayer had to spend over £50,000 on
repairs. The Special Commissioners allowed a deduction of only
£12,000 as being applicable to the period during which the taxpayer
was the owner of the ship. The Court of Session, Scotland (First
Division) held that the amount disallowed was of a capital nature and
not deductible.
130. More recently, the English Court of Appeal in Odeon Associated
Theatres v. Jones (Inspector of Taxes) [1972] 1 All ER 681 held that
expenditure of £7,969 incurred during the period 1948-56 (in respect
of dilapidations which occurred before acquisition) on the Regal
Cinema at Marble Arch, which was acquired for £240,000 in January
1945 in a somewhat run-down condition, was expenditure of a
revenue character.
131. A key reason for the decision was that, although the cinema was
in disrepair at the date it was acquired, this had no effect on the
purchase price. The purchase price was not affected because there was
a war-time prohibition on repairing cinemas, causing all cinemas to be
in a similarly dilapidated condition. We take the view that the
Taxation Ruling


TR 97/23
page 32 of 52                                     FOI status: may be released



decision in the Odeon Theatres case should not be followed in
Australia.


Alternative view
132. It has been suggested, however, that the Odeon Theatres case
supports the view that expenditure on initial repairs is deductible
under section 25-10 and not excluded as capital expenditure. On this
view, repair expenditure is deductible if the property acquired - though
in a state of disrepair at the time of the acquisition - is suitable for use
for income purposes and if the purchase price of the property is not
affected by that state of disrepair.
133. Even if the Odeon Theatres case is authority in the United
Kingdom for the proposition that expenditure on initial repairs is not
capital expenditure if a property's state of disrepair did not affect its
suitability for use or its purchase price, we consider that it is not
authority for that proposition in Australia. Such a proposition would,
in our view, be inconsistent with the more persuasive precedent of the
High Court of Australia in the W Thomas & Co case. In our view, the
decision in the Odeon Theatres case is not likely to be followed in
Australia: see Case D47 72 ATC 272 per AM Donovan (Chairman)
and RK Todd (Member) at 291; (1972) 18 CTBR (NS) Case 14 at 102
and Case V83 88 ATC 580 per DJ Trowse (Member) at 583; AAT
Case 4371 (1988) 19 ATR 3540 at 3542. Since the Odeon Theatres
case was decided in 1972 it has not been followed in Australia by
former Taxation Board of Review No 2 (Case D47; Case 14) or by the
Administrative Appeals Tribunal (Case V83; AAT Case 4371).
134. We believe it is important to recognise that the proposition that
expenditure on initial repairs is capital expenditure is not some unique
principle. There is no general proposition that initial repair costs are
not deductible for income tax purposes. Rather, the proposition that
initial repair costs are of a capital nature is a particular application of
the general tests set out by Dixon J in Sun Newspapers Ltd v. FC of T
(1938) 61 CLR 337; (1938) 5 ATD 87 for determining what is capital
expenditure. Under these tests, expenditure relating to the
establishment, replacement or enlargement of the profit-yielding
structure, as opposed to expenditure incurred in the operation of that
structure, is of a capital nature: see Case P5 (1963) 14 TBRD 14 at
25; (1963) 11 CTBR (NS) Case 44 per RE O'Neill (Member) at 218;
Case R101 84 ATC 673 per TJ McCarthy (Member) at 675; (1984)
27 CTBR (NS) Case 154 at 1209 and Case V83 88 ATC 580 per DJ
Trowse (Member) at 583; AAT Case 4371 (1988) 19 ATR 3540 at
3542-3.
                                                           Taxation Ruling


                                                TR 97/23
FOI status: may be released                                  page 33 of 52



Initial repairs to property obtained by lease or licence
135. Expenditure for initial repairs after property is obtained under
lease or licence is of a capital nature and is not deductible under
section 25-10. Initial repair costs incurred on property after it is
purchased relate to the establishment of the profit-yielding structure
and are therefore of a capital nature; initial repair costs incurred on
property after it is obtained under a lease or licence relate to the
establishment of the profit-yielding structure and are also of a capital
nature. Therefore, for the same reasons that initial repairs are not
deductible after the purchase of property, we take the view that
expenditure for initial repairs after property is obtained under lease or
licence is not deductible under section 25-10. In (1956) 6 CTBR (NS)
Case 55, Taxation Board of Review No 2 held that initial repair costs
incurred by a weekly tenant of premises were of a capital nature and
not deductible under section 51 or 53 of the ITAA 1936.


Initial repair costs can be dissected or apportioned
136. Subsection 25-10(3) states that you cannot deduct capital
expenditure under section 25-10. The old law referred to expenditure
incurred for repairs, not being expenditure of a capital nature.
This, in our opinion, allowed apportionment. After property is
acquired by a taxpayer, it may deteriorate more during the period it is
held, etc., by the taxpayer for income purposes than it had deteriorated
when it was acquired by the taxpayer. The cost of bringing the
property back to the state of efficiency of function that it was in when
acquired by the taxpayer is deductible as a repair not of a capital
nature. In other words, provided that the whole of the expenditure is
for repairs, some part of that expenditure may be of a capital nature
and some part of it may be deductible.
137. Expenditure for repairs to recently acquired property is fully
deductible only if it involves the remedying of defects, damage or
deterioration wholly attributable to the period in which the property is
held, etc., by the taxpayer for income purposes. If, on the other hand,
the expenditure involves putting the property in order suitable for use
or the cost of remedying defects, or restoring damage or deterioration
existing at the time of purchase, it is of a capital nature and not
deductible under the old law. As a general rule of thumb, but subject
to the facts in each particular case, repairs effected soon after the
purchase of property often rectify defects in, damage to, or
deterioration present in the property at the time of purchase.
138. Initial repair expenses can be dissected or apportioned under
section 25-10 to allow a deduction to the extent to which the repair
work remedies defects, damage or deterioration arising from the
Taxation Ruling


TR 97/23
page 34 of 52                                         FOI status: may be released



taxpayer's holding, etc., of the property for income purposes after it is
acquired: see the Law Shipping case where the Special
Commissioners allowed a deduction of £12,000 (out of a sum of
£51,558 incurred on repairs) as being applicable to the period during
which the company owned the ship. See also (1962) 10 CTBR (NS)
Case 84; (1963) 11 CTBR (NS) Case 63; (1950) 1 CTBR (NS) Case
18 and (1959) 8 CTBR (NS) Case 137 in which purchased properties
were repaired and Taxation Boards of Review allowed a portion of
repair expenditure; contrast the views of Senior Member, Mr PM
Roach, in Case V167 88 ATC 1107; AAT Case 12 (1986) 18 ATR
3056 and Case W7 89 ATC 161; AAT Case 4845 (1988) 20 ATR
3170.
139. We accept that Windeyer J in the Thomas case (at 115 CLR 74;
14 ATD 88) was saying nothing more than that there was insufficient
evidence in relation to the items of expenditure he was considering in
that particular case to permit him a basis of apportionment.
Windeyer J was not saying categorically that apportionment is never
possible. This approach is also suggested by his Honour citing with
approval the decision in the Law Shipping case.
140. We accept, for example, that a court might agree to
apportionment if a taxpayer is able to identify the extent to which
repair expenditure is necessitated by deterioration arising after
property is acquired and is attributable to the taxpayer's holding, etc.,
of the property for income purposes.


Some specific issues in construing section 25-10
(Note: see ruling at paragraphs 67 to 74 and examples at paragraphs 180 and 181 of
this Ruling)


Expenditure incurred by a taxpayer on repairs to property that the
taxpayer does not own
141. It is not a specific requirement of section 25-10, unlike section
42-15, that property be owned by the taxpayer.
142. Entitlement to a deduction under section 25-10 for expenditure
incurred by a taxpayer for repairs to property depends on whether the
taxpayer held or used the property for income purposes.
143. A lessee of premises, or a person granted a licence to use
premises, is entitled to a deduction under section 25-10 for repair
expenditure if the lessee or licensee meets these requirements, i.e.,
holds, or uses the premises for income purposes, even though he or
she does not own the premises.
                                                                   Taxation Ruling


                                                      TR 97/23
FOI status: may be released                                           page 35 of 52



Expenditure for repairs must be 'incurred'
144. Section 25-10 requires that you 'incur' expenditure for repairs for
it to be deductible. For this purpose, the word 'incur' in section 25-10
has the same meaning as that given by the courts to the word 'incurred'
in subsection 51(1) of the ITAA 1936: Case Q48 (1965) 15 TBRD
229. Broadly stated, to be 'incurred' there needs to be a presently
existing pecuniary obligation in relation to the repairs that has become
due, but not necessarily payable, at that time. The taxpayer must be
definitively committed to the expenditure.


Expenditure for repairs before property is held, etc., for income
purposes
(Note: see ruling at paragraph 75 and example at paragraph 182 of this Ruling)
145. Under section 25-10, a deduction is allowed for expenditure for
repairs to property held, etc., for income purposes. Expenditure
incurred in repairing property is not deductible if the property is not
held, etc., nor ever has been held, etc., for income purposes.
Furthermore, the expenditure is likely to be capital expenditure. If it
is, the exception for capital expenditure operates to deny a deduction.
As the Administrative Appeals Tribunal (Mr PM Roach, Senior
Member) said in Case V167 88 ATC 1107 at 1111; AAT Case 12
(1986) 18 ATR 3056 at 3059:
      'If a taxpayer buys a property with the view to letting it at a rent
      and immediately paints it throughout before letting it, the
      expenditure may be fairly characterised as capital ... '


Expenditure for repairs to property previously used for
non-income producing purposes
(Note: see ruling at paragraphs 76 and 77 and examples at paragraphs 183 and 184
of this Ruling)
146. Repair expenditure, incurred by a taxpayer in a year of income
on property held, etc., in earlier years for non-income purposes, can
qualify for deduction under section 25-10 if the property is held, etc.,
for income purposes when the repair expenditure is incurred: see
Case V167 88 ATC 1107; AAT Case 12 (1986) 18 ATR 3056 and
Case W7 89 ATC 161; AAT Case 4845 (1988) 20 ATR 3170.


Expenditure for repairs to property used for the purpose of
providing non-deductible entertainment
(Note: see ruling at paragraph 78 and example at paragraph 185 of this Ruling)
147. If:
Taxation Ruling


TR 97/23
page 36 of 52                                         FOI status: may be released



      (a)       expenditure is incurred by a taxpayer for repairs to
                property; and
      (b)       when the expenditure is incurred the property is being used
                by the taxpayer in providing entertainment;
no deduction is allowable under section 8-1 or section 25-10 for the
repair expenditure to the extent that the property is used for non-
deductible entertainment: see section 32-15 of the ITAA 1997, when
read with section 32-5 of that Act (or the former section 51AE of the
ITAA 1936).
148. By section 32-15, use of property by a taxpayer in providing
entertainment (whether or not the property is also used for another
purpose) is taken not to be for the purpose of producing assessable
income if section 32-5 would prevent the taxpayer deducting a loss or
outgoing if the taxpayer incurred it in providing the entertainment. No
deduction is allowable for the repair expenditure, or it is
proportionately reduced, because the property fails to satisfy the
requirement that it be used for income producing purposes.
Subsection 51AE(14) of the ITAA 1936 provided, in essence, the
same result.
149. Entertainment means:
       (a)      entertainment by way of food, drink or recreation; or
       (b) accommodation or travel to do with providing
           entertainment by way of food, drink or recreation:
           subsection 32-10(1) of the ITAA 1997.
150. You are taken by subsection 32-10(2) to provide entertainment
even if business discussions or transactions occur.


Expenditure for repairs to property used only partly for income
purposes during a year of income
(Note: see ruling at paragraph 79 and examples at paragraphs 186 and 187 of this
Ruling)
151. Before considering the operation of subsection 25-10(2), which
applies if you held or used property only partly for income purposes,
it is necessary to review the history of subsection 53(3) of the ITAA
1936.
152. Expenditure on repairs incurred before 19 April 1984 (when
subsection 53(3) was inserted into the ITAA 1936 ) was deductible in
full so long as the property was used to some extent for income
purposes: see Case Q11 83 ATC 41; (1983) 26 CTBR (NS) Case 75
and Case Q98 83 ATC 487; (1983) 27 CTBR (NS) Case 26.
                                                           Taxation Ruling


                                               TR 97/23
FOI status: may be released                                  page 37 of 52



153. Subsection 53(3) was inserted to overcome this result. By that
subsection, expenditure for repairs to property held, etc., only partly
for income purposes was deductible to the extent that the
Commissioner considered reasonable in the circumstances of the case.
According to the explanatory memorandum accompanying Income
Tax Assessment Amendment Bill (No 3) 1984, subsection 53(3)
meant that expenditure for repairs attributable to private or domestic
use, or to earning exempt income, was not allowable.
154. Subsection 53(3) allowed an apportionment of expenditure
incurred by a taxpayer in a year of income for repairs to property held,
etc., partly in that year for income purposes and partly for non-
income purposes. The amount of the expenditure allowable was
ordinarily an amount calculated by reference to the extent to which the
property was held, etc., in the year of income for income purposes.
155. Apportionment of repair expenditure incurred in a year of
income was not available, however, if the property had been held, etc.,
by a taxpayer in earlier years of income for purposes other than
income purposes. We based this opinion on the legislative history of
subsection 53(3) and, in particular, on the legislative intention to
overcome the conclusions reached in Case Q11; Case 75 and Case
Q98; Case 26.
156. We took the view that the correct construction of subsection
53(3) required that the relevant percentage of business use of property
in a year of income be calculated as a proportion of the total use of the
property in that year. Once calculated for a particular year of income,
the percentage was applied to the whole repair expenditure incurred in
the year. This meant, for example, that if a motor vehicle was used in
a year of income 70 percent of the time for business purposes and
repair expenditure was incurred on the vehicle, 70 percent of the
expenditure was properly allowable. This was the case if the repair
expenditure was incurred following an accident, whether the accident
happened while the vehicle was being used for business or for non-
business purposes.


Alternative views
157. We acknowledge, but do not concede as producing a proper
interpretation of subsection 53(3), the following alternative views.


View 1
158. If the accident referred to in paragraph 156 happened while the
vehicle was being used for income purposes, 100 percent of the repair
Taxation Ruling


TR 97/23
page 38 of 52                                          FOI status: may be released



costs were allowable. If the vehicle was being used for non-income
purposes, 70 percent of the repair costs were allowable.


View 2
159. If the accident referred to above happened while the vehicle was
being used for income purposes, 100 per cent of the repair costs were
deductible. If the vehicle was being used for non-income purposes, no
repair costs were allowable.
160. Turning to subsection 25-10(2), it broadly corresponds with
subsection 53(3), except that the Commissioner's discretion to
determine the amount of the deduction has been replaced with an
objective test of what is reasonable in the circumstances. Apart from
this exception, subsection 25-10(2) expresses the same ideas as
subsection 53(3).
161. We take the same views, for the purpose of the objective test in
subsection 25-10(2), as those stated in paragraphs 154 to 156 of this
Ruling for the former subsection 53(3).


Examples
Meaning of the word 'repairs'
(Note: see ruling at paragraphs 12 to 30 and explanations at paragraphs 83 to 107 of
this Ruling)


Example 1
162. Sam Tabernarius, a shopkeeper, decides to replace the awning of
his shop with a more modern and aesthetic equivalent. The awning is
in good condition before the work is done; there is nothing to be
restored, no decayed or worn out parts to be renewed and nothing
loose or detached which requires fixing. The expenditure involved is
not for repairs - the awning being in good repair before the work was
done - and no deduction is allowable under section 25-10 of the ITAA
1997.


Example 2
163. By January 1997, Widgets Pty Ltd has used a building for a
manufacturing plant for many years. Widgets Pty Ltd discovers on
testing for contaminants that insulation in the roof and walls contains
dangerous levels of asbestos fibres. The contaminated insulation had
been placed in the building by the previous owner. The company
                                                                   Taxation Ruling


                                                      TR 97/23
FOI status: may be released                                           page 39 of 52



immediately set about removing the insulation and replacing it with a
safe alternative. Expenditure incurred by Widgets Pty Ltd in removing
and replacing the insulation is not a 'repair' and not deductible under
section 25-10. However, because the expenditure is incurred entirely
for an environment protection activity, namely, removing pollution
from a site on which the company carries on its income producing
activities (subparagraph 82BM(1)(a)(ii) of the ITAA 1936), it is
deductible under subsection 82BK(1) of that Act. The expenditure is
not in respect of constructing an improvement to the building so
subsection 82BN(1) of that Act does not preclude a deduction under
the environment protection provisions.


Repair expenditure of a capital nature
(Note: see ruling at paragraphs 31 to 35 and explanations at paragraphs 108 to 112
of this Ruling)


Example 3
164. Elle Bashful uses her truck for income producing purposes. She
replaces the truck's worn out petrol engine with a diesel engine with a
much greater economy of operation. The engine is not an entirety but
a subsidiary part of truck. However, the costs relate to an
improvement of the truck because the replacement of the engine
involved a significantly greater efficiency in the truck's function. The
engine is a major and important part of the truck and is a new and
better engine with considerable advantages over the old one, including
the advantage that it reduces the likelihood of future repair bills. The
costs are of a capital nature and are not deductible under section 25-
10: cf (1953) 3 CTBR (NS) Case 82. A deduction for depreciation
under section 42-15 may be allowable.


Distinction between repair and either renewal or reconstruction -
what constitutes the 'entirety'
(Note: see ruling at paragraphs 36 to 43 and explanations at paragraphs 113 to 119
of this Ruling)
Example 4
165. Mr Fermier and Mr Agricola are neighbouring farmers affected
by a severe bushfire. Mr Fermier restores his existing fencing to good
condition by mending it and replacing damaged sections, e.g., the
fence on the northern boundary. Mr Agricola replaces the entire
fencing surrounding his property.
166. Mr Fermier is entitled to claim a deduction for the cost of
repairing his fencing under section 25-10. The entirety is the total
Taxation Ruling


TR 97/23
page 40 of 52                                   FOI status: may be released



fencing so replacing the fences on the northern boundary is a
replacement of a subsidiary part of the whole fencing: cf (1963)
11 CTBR (NS) Case 44.
167. However, Mr Agricola's expenditure is not deductible under
section 25-10 because the whole fencing was replaced, making it a
reconstruction of the entirety. The total fencing is not a subsidiary
part of the rural property or of anything else. To replace entire fencing
with new fencing is to replace one capital asset with another capital
asset. The cost is therefore of a capital nature: cf (1962) 10 CTBR
(NS) Case 58. Mr Agricola's fences are depreciable 'plant' (paragraph
42-18(1)(c) of the ITAA 1997 or the former subparagraph 54(2)(b)(i)
of the ITAA 1936) and are deductible under section 42-15.


Replacement or substantial reconstruction of the entirety
Example 5
168. After recent bushfires the local State Electricity Authority
inspects electricity poles on a number of properties. The Authority
advises Mr Hogg, a pig farmer, that his electricity poles and overhead
power lines are unsound, due to damage caused by the bushfires. To
rectify the damage caused, he replaces these with underground cables.
The cabling is a part of a larger system by which electricity is brought
to the farm, distributed for use, and usage measured. Further, even
though underground cables are better protected from future bushfires
and storms, no greater efficiency of function of the electricity system
is provided by the cables. Accordingly, the expenditure incurred by
Mr Hogg is a repair, and deductible under section 25-10. If Mr Hogg
had merely replaced the poles and cables, the expenditure incurred
would also be a repair, and deductible accordingly. If the electricity
connection is used for both domestic and business purposes, the
deduction is limited by subsection 25-10(2) to that part of Mr Hogg's
expenditure which reasonably relates to the use of the electricity
connection for business purposes. (Any amount received by Mr Hogg
by way of insurance or indemnity in respect of the expenditure
incurred in replacing poles or overhead wires should be included in Mr
Hogg's assessable income in terms of subsection 20-20(2) of the ITAA
1997 to the extent to which the expenditure is an allowable
deduction.)
169. Note that there is an alternative view that the circumstances of
this example may, in fact, amount to the replacement of an 'entirety',
or an improvement. Although the decision in this matter is a
borderline one, we consider that, on balance, the marginally better
view - in keeping with our longstanding position on this matter - is
that the facts of this example amount to the making of a repair.
                                                                    Taxation Ruling


                                                       TR 97/23
FOI status: may be released                                           page 41 of 52




Example 6
170. Mr P Bowser owns a service station that is not connected to
mains power supply. He has meters and a pumping plant to supply
power to the service station. He has to replace both the meters and the
pumping plant due to their old age. The meters and the pumping plant
are entireties in their own right, separate and distinct from the service
station. Their replacement is not a repair and the cost is not deductible
under section 25-10: Case 36 (1949) 15 TBRD (OS) 287.


'Notional' repairs
(Note: see ruling at paragraph 35 and explanations at paragraph 112 of this Ruling)
Example 7
171. Ken-the-Shopfitter runs a factory in a building in which the
wooden floor needs repairing. The options are either to repair the old
floor or to replace it with an entirely new one of steel and concrete.
Ken decides to adopt the second option because it will save future
repairs and because it has distinct advantages over the old wooden
floor. By choosing the second option, Ken cannot claim a deduction
as if he had simply repaired the wooden floor. His actual expenditure
being capital, none of it is allowable as a repair.


Distinction between a repair and an improvement
Material used different from original material
(Note: see ruling at paragraphs 44 to 57 and explanations at paragraphs 120 to 124
of this Ruling)
Example 8
172. Mary Fabrica owns a factory in which the bitumen floor laid on
a gravel base needs repairing. She replaces it with a new floor
consisting of an underlay of concrete topped with granolith (a paving
stone of crushed granite and cement). The new floor, from a
functional efficiency (rather than an appearance) point of view, is not
superior in quality to the old floor. The new floor performs precisely
the same function as the old and is no more satisfactory. In fact, the
new floor is more expensive to repair than the old. Because the new
floor is not a substantial improvement, it is a repair and its cost is
deductible under section 25-10: Case T75 (1968) 18 TBRD 377;
(1968) 14 CTBR (NS) Case 40.
Taxation Ruling


TR 97/23
page 42 of 52                                       FOI status: may be released



Technological advances or enhancements
Example 9
173. Switched-On Pty Ltd decides, after controlling its furnace for
25 years with electro-mechanical switches and gauges, to replace them
with computerised controls. The computerised controls perform the
same function as the original controls. Electro-mechanical controls
are no longer mass produced and, if made to order, would cost
substantially more than the computerised controls. The degree of
improvement in the efficiency of the furnace's function is only minor
and incidental, its character has not changed and the operation and
output of the furnace have not altered. The cost of replacing the
controls is deductible under section 25-10 of the ITAA 1997.


Example 10
174. Wind Tunnel Pty Ltd has a malfunctioning vibration monitor for
one of its blower fans. It replaces the old monitor with a digital
monitor. The new monitor gives a more accurate reading than the old
one but this is superfluous to the company's needs because it only
needs to ensure that the blower operates within a certain vibration
range. The facility for reading a precise vibration level is inherent in
the digital technology used in the new monitor. The monitor involved
no extra cost. The degree of improvement in the efficiency of the
blower fan's function is only minor and incidental and its character, as
a blower fan, has not changed. Bearing in mind that the additional
capacity of the monitor exceeds the taxpayer's needs, and viewing the
issue from the particular taxpayer's proposed use of the blower fan and
monitor, the monitor's cost is deductible under section 25-10.


Example 11
175. Gurgler Pty Ltd needs to replace the impellor in a pump it has
used for five years. A new impellor made from stainless steel would
cost $8,000. If the original cast iron impellor is replaced with another
cast iron one, it would cost about $4,000. The stainless steel impellor
is chosen because it will provide improved functional efficiency for
the pump. It will perform more efficiently as an impellor and will last
three to four times longer than the cast iron type. The cost of the
stainless steel impellor is not deductible under section 25-10 because:
      (a)       there is a substantial improvement in the functional
                efficiency of both the impellor and the pump;
      (b)       the impellor is a major and important structural part of the
                pump;
                                                                   Taxation Ruling


                                                           TR 97/23
FOI status: may be released                                           page 43 of 52



       (c)    the impellor is new and better than the original impellor;
              and
       (d)    the stainless steel impellor has considerable advantages
              over the old cast iron one, including the advantage that it
              reduces the likelihood of repair bills in the future.


Repairs and improvements effected concurrently
(Note: see ruling at paragraphs 55 to 57 of this Ruling)
Example 12
176. Tracey owns a factory. The council has advised her to repair
faulty wiring, reposition existing electrical outlets and install new
power points, mains and switchboards. Only part of the expenditure is
incurred on repair work. Individual parts of the work are capable of
being classified as repairs, if examined in isolation from the remainder
of the work. The costs of the work relating to repairing the faulty
wiring only is deductible under section 25-10, provided the costs can
be segregated and accurately quantified. Tracey must be able to
segregate the costs of repairing the wiring from the (capital) costs of
the electrical improvements. Tracey is required by section 262A of
the ITAA 1936 to keep records that explain all transactions and other
acts she engages in that are relevant for any purpose of the income tax
law. It is advisable for Tracey to seek separate quotes and to maintain
separate accounts in relation to the costs of repairing the wiring and
the cost of electrical improvements.


Expenditure to remedy defects, damage or deterioration in
existence at the date of acquisition (initial repairs)
(Note: see ruling at paragraphs 59 to 66 and explanations at paragraphs 125 to 140
of this Ruling)
Example 13
177. William Infelix purchases a house that was ostensibly in good
repair. To make it more attractive to prospective tenants, minor
repairs and renovations are undertaken. The minor repairs and
renovations are initial repairs. Their cost is of a capital nature and not
deductible. During the course of these repairs and renovations,
William discovers that the woodwork is seriously affected by the
ravages of white ants.
178. Substantial expenditure is incurred to remedy the problems
caused by the white ant infestation to restore the property to a state in
which it is suitable for occupation by tenants.
Taxation Ruling


TR 97/23
page 44 of 52                                          FOI status: may be released



179. The expenditure incurred in these circumstances to fix the white
ant problem existing at the date of purchase is also of a capital nature.
It is therefore not deductible under section 25-10. The fact that
William was unaware of the problem when he purchased the house,
and the fact that he would have paid a lower purchase price if he had
known of the need for repairs, do not alter the capital nature of the
expense: Case 64 (1944) 11 TBRD (OS) 202 and the W Thomas &
Co case.


Some specific issues in construing section 25-10
(Note: see ruling at paragraphs 67 to 74 and explanations at paragraphs 141 to 144
of this Ruling)
Expenditure incurred by a taxpayer on repairs to property that the
taxpayer does not own
Example 14
180. Farmer Ted Kelly has poor access to one of his main paddocks.
To gain access to the paddock for sowing, reaping his crops, etc., Ted
uses a road over an adjoining farm owned by Ken Hall. Ted uses his
neighbour's road with Ken's concurrence. Ken's road is a sand and
gravel road that is not an all-weather one. Over time, Ken's road needs
to be resurfaced with a grader. Ted meets the cost of grading Ken's
road. The cost is deductible by Ted because he uses the road in
carrying on his business to produce assessable income, even though he
does not own the road.


Example 15
181. Maureen and Pam Cook conduct a restaurant business from
premises they lease. Because their landlord is reluctant to spend
money on the premises, Maureen and Pam periodically undertake
repairs to the premises. They are entitled to a deduction for their
expenditure under section 25-10.


Expenditure for repairs before property is held, etc., for income
purposes
(Note: see ruling at paragraph 75 and explanations at paragraph 145 of this Ruling)
Example 16
182. Mary-Ellen Walton, after the death of her spouse, decided to
move out of the long-held family home and to rent it to tenants. She
leaves the property on 15 July 1996. To make it more attractive for
prospective tenants, Mary-Ellen undertakes major repairs and
renovations to the house between August 1996 and February 1997.
                                                                    Taxation Ruling


                                                       TR 97/23
FOI status: may be released                                            page 45 of 52



She places the house in the hands of a real estate agent on 15 March
1997 and lets the house to tenants on 1 April 1997. The costs of the
repairs and renovations are not deductible under the old law. When
the costs were incurred, Mary-Ellen was not holding or using the
house to produce rental income. The costs are an expense in preparing
the house for producing rent. They are of a capital nature.


Expenditure for repairs to property previously used for non-
income producing purposes
(Note: see ruling at paragraphs 76 and 77 and explanations at paragraph 146 of this
Ruling)
Example 17
183. Brenton Viator owns a motor vehicle that he bought in
December 1992. On 1 July 1995 he applied for and got a job as a
travelling salesperson and commenced to use his vehicle solely for
income producing purposes. On 15 August 1996 Brenton incurs repair
expenditure on the vehicle. The cost of the repairs is deductible under
the old law because the costs were incurred in the 1996-97 year and,
on 15 August 1996, the vehicle was being used for income producing
purposes. This is so even though the repairs may relate, in part, to a
period when the vehicle was used for private purposes.


Example 18
184. A building has been owned by a tax exempt entity for a number
of years. At the start of a new taxation year, the entity changes its
operational activities so that it is now a taxable entity carrying on
business for income-producing purposes. During this year, extensive
repair work is done to the building. The cost of this repair work is
fully deductible under section 25-10 even though some of the
deterioration that is remedied is attributable to the period when the
body was not taxable. Subdivision 57-G of Schedule 2D of the ITAA
1936 does not deny the deductions for the repairs.


Expenditure for repairs to property used for the purpose of
providing non-deductible entertainment
(Note: see ruling at paragraph 78 and explanations at paragraphs 147 to 150 of this
Ruling)
Example 19
185. Generous Co Ltd, a large accounting firm, uses a cruiser solely
for the entertainment of its existing and prospective clients, business
associates and staff by taking them on sightseeing river and ocean
Taxation Ruling


TR 97/23
page 46 of 52                                          FOI status: may be released



cruises. The company incurs $10,000 in repairing deterioration of the
cruiser due to normal operating wear and tear. No deduction is
allowable under section 8-1 or under section 25-10 for the repair costs.


Expenditure for repairs to property used only partly for income
producing purposes during a year of income
(Note: see ruling at paragraph 79 and explanations at paragraphs 151 to 161 of this
Ruling)
Example 20
186. Josephine Telefix, a television repairer, owns a station wagon
that is used for 70% business and 30% private purposes during the
taxation year. Repair costs of $10,000 are incurred on the front
panels, engine and computer system in the station wagon following a
car accident during the running of the business. The full amount of
the repair costs of $10,000 is not deductible under section 25-10.
Because Josephine uses the station wagon for private and for business
purposes, subsection 25-10(2) limits the amount of her deduction to
that part of the expenditure that reasonably relates to the use of the
station wagon for business purposes, namely, $7,000.


Example 21
187. Assume the facts in Example 20 are unchanged except that the
accident occurs while Josephine is using the station wagon driving to
Church, i.e., for private purposes. We reject the view that no part of
the repair costs is deductible under section 25-10. Because Josephine
uses the station wagon for private and for business purposes,
subsection 25-10(2) limits the amount of her deduction to that part of
the expenditure that reasonably relates to the use of the station wagon
for business purposes, namely, $7,000.


Detailed contents list
188. Below is a detailed list of the contents of this Ruling:
                                                                     paragraph
What this Ruling is about                                                      1
Class of person/arrangement                                                    1
Previous Rulings now withdrawn                                                11
Ruling                                                                        12
Meaning of the word 'repairs'                                                 12
                                                             Taxation Ruling


                                               TR 97/23
FOI status: may be released                                    page 47 of 52



      Context of the word 'repairs' in section 25-10                 12
      Ordinary meaning of 'repairs'                                  13
      Restoration of the efficiency of function of the property      17
      Need for exercise of judgment                                  18
      Maintenance work - whether 'repair'                            19
      Question of fact and degree                                    21
      Work done solely to meet requirements of regulatory
      bodies                                                         23
      Expenditure to control health risks from dangerous
      substances                                                     26
Repair expenditure of a capital nature                               31
      In what situations is repair expenditure of a capital
      nature?                                                        31
      No deduction for 'notional' repairs                            35
Distinction between repair and either renewal or
reconstruction - what is meant by the 'entirety'                     36
      Repair is distinct from renewal or reconstruction              36
      What is an 'entirety'?                                         37
      Progressive restoration can involve deductible repairs         43
Distinction between a repair and an improvement                      44
      Repair is distinct from improvement                            44
      Use of different materials                                     48
      Technological advances or enhancements                         53
      Repairs done at the same time as improvements                  55
Expenditure to remedy defects, damage or deterioration
in existence at the date of acquisition (initial repairs)            59
      Initial repairs are of a capital nature and not deductible     59
      Initial repairs to property obtained by lease or licence       62
      Initial repair costs can be dissected or apportioned           63
Some specific issues in construing section 25-10                     67
      Expenditure incurred by a taxpayer on repairs to
      property that the taxpayer does not own                        67
Expenditure for repairs must be 'incurred'                           71
      Property must be held or used bone fide for income
      purposes                                                       72
Taxation Ruling


TR 97/23
page 48 of 52                                   FOI status: may be released



      Expenditure for repairs after property is held, etc., for
      income purposes but before income is actually derived         73
      Scope of repair deduction provision and general
      deduction provision                                           74
Expenditure for repairs before property is held, etc., for income
purposes                                                          75
Expenditure for repairs to property previously used by
the taxpayer for non-income producing purposes                      76
Expenditure for repairs to property used for the purpose
of providing non-deductible entertainment                           78
Expenditure for repairs to property used only partly for income
producing purposes during a year of income                          79
Date of effect                                                      80
Explanations                                                        83
Meaning of the word 'repairs'                                       83
      Ordinary meaning of the word 'repairs' in
      its context in section 25-10                                  83
      Restoration of efficiency of function of the property         88
      Functionality of the property on which the work is done       90
      Maintenance work - whether 'repair'                           92
      Work done to meet requirements of regulatory bodies           96
      Alternative view                                             100
      Technological advances or enhancements                       105
In what situations is repair expenditure of a capital nature?      108
      No deduction for notional repairs                            112
Distinction between repair and either renewal or
reconstruction - what is meant by the 'entirety'                   113
      Repair is distinct from renewal or replacement               113
      What is an entirety?                                         115
      Progressive restoration can involve deductible repairs       119
Distinction between a repair and an improvement                    120
Expenditure to remedy defects, damage or deterioration
in existence at the date of acquisition (initial repairs)          125
      Initial repairs are of a capital nature and not deductible 125
      Alternative view                                             132
                                                             Taxation Ruling


                                                TR 97/23
FOI status: may be released                                    page 49 of 52



      Initial repairs to property obtained by lease or licence      135
      Initial repair costs can be dissected or apportioned          136
Some specific issues in construing section 25-10                    141
      Expenditure incurred by a taxpayer on repairs
      to property that the taxpayer does not own                    141
      Expenditure for repairs must be 'incurred'                    144
Expenditure for repairs before property is held, etc., for
income purposes                                                     145
Expenditure for repairs to property previously used for
non-income producing purposes                                       146
Expenditure for repairs to property used for the purpose of
providing non-deductible entertainment                              147
Expenditure for repairs to property used only partly for
income purposes during a year of income                             151
      Alternative views                                             157
             View 1                                                 158
             View 2                                                 159
Examples                                                            162
Meaning of the word 'repairs'                                       162
             Example 1                                              162
             Example 2                                              163
Repair expenditure of a capital nature                              164
             Example 3                                              164
Distinction between repair and either renewal or
reconstruction - what constitutes the 'entirety'                    165
             Example 4                                              165
      Replacement or substantial reconstruction of the entirety 168
             Example 5                                              168
             Example 6                                              170
      'Notional' repairs                                            171
             Example 7                                              171
Distinction between a repair and an improvement                     172
      Material used different from original material                172
             Example 8                                              172
Taxation Ruling


TR 97/23
page 50 of 52                                  FOI status: may be released



       Technological advances or enhancements                     173
                Example 9                                         173
                Example 10                                        174
                Example 11                                        175
       Repairs and improvements effected concurrently             176
                Example 12                                        176
Expenditure to remedy defects, damage or deterioration
in existence at the date of acquisition (initial repairs)         177
                Example 13                                        177
Some specific issues in construing section 25-10                  180
       Expenditure incurred by a taxpayer on repairs to
       property that the taxpayer does not own                    180
                Example 14                                        180
                Example 15                                        181
Expenditure for repairs before property is held, etc., for income
purposes                                                          182
                Example 16                                        182
Expenditure for repairs to property previously used for
non-income producing purposes                                     183
                Example 17                                        183
                Example 18                                        184
Expenditure for repairs to property used for the purpose
of providing non-deductible entertainment                         185
                Example 19                                        185
Expenditure for repairs to property used only partly for
income producing purposes during a year of income                 186
                Example 20                                        186
                Example 21                                        187
Detailed contents list                                            188




Commissioner of Taxation
3 December 1997
ISSN      1039 - 0731
                                                              Taxation Ruling


                                                 TR 97/23
FOI status: may be released                                     page 51 of 52



ATO references                         -   ITAA97 8-1
NO      97/9762-9                      -   ITAA97 25-10
        97/8922-7                      -   ITAA97 25-10(1)
        96/3526-2                      -   ITAA97 25-10(2)
        96/527-8                       -   ITAA97 32-5
        95/8640-7                      -   ITAA97 32-10(1)
BO      TRUMG 94/4                     -   ITAA97 32-10(2)
                                       -   ITAA97 32-15
Previously released in draft form as   -   ITAA97 42-15
TR 94/D31                              -   ITAA97 Div 43

Price     $5.30                        case references
                                       - BP Oil Refinery (Bulwer Island) Ltd
FOI index detail                          v. FC of T 92 ATC 4031; (1992) 23
reference number                          ATR 65
    I 1017365                          - Brown (Inspector of Taxes) v.
                                          Burnley Football and Athletic Co
subject references                        Ltd [1980] 3 All ER 244
- allowable deduction                  - Day v. Harland and Wolff 1953] 2
- capital                                 All ER 387
- entertainment                        - FC of T v. Western Suburbs
- entirety                                Cinemas Ltd 1952) 86 CLR 102;
- environmental protection                (1952) 9 ATD 452
   expenditure                         - Hallstroms Pty Ltd v. FC of T
- improvement                             (1946) 72 CLR 634; (1946) 8 ATD
- initial repairs                         190
- maintenance                          - Hoddinott v. Newton, Chambers &
- notional repairs                        Co Ltd [1901] AC 49
- reconstruction                       - Lindsay v. FC of T (1960) 106 CLR
- renewal                                 197; (1960) 12 ATD 505
- renovation                           - Lister v. Lane & Nesham [1893] 2
- repair                                  QB 212
- replacement                          - London & North Eastern Ry. Co. v.
- restoration                             Berriman [1946] 1 All ER 255
                                       - Lurcott v. Wakely & Wheeler
legislative references                    [1911] 1 KB 905
- ITAA36 51(1)                         - Odeon Associated Theatres Ltd v.
- ITAA36 51AE                             Jones (Inspector of Taxes) [1972] 1
- ITAA36 51AE(14)                         All ER 681
- ITAA36 53                            - Placer Pacific Management Pty Ltd
- ITAA36 53(1)                            v. FC of T 95 ATC 4459; (1995) 31
- ITAA36 53(3)                            ATR 253
- ITAA36 54(1)                         - Ready Mixed Concrete (Victoria)
- ITAA36 54(2)(b)(i)                      Pty Ltd v. FC of T (1969) 118 CLR
- ITAA36 82(1)                            177; (1969) 15 ATD 215
- ITAA36 82BH                          - Regent Oil Co Ltd v. Strick
- ITAA36 82BK(1)                          Inspector of Taxes [1965] 3 All ER
- ITAA36 82BL(3)                          174
- ITAA36 82BM(1)(a)                    - Samuel Jones & Co (Devondale) Ltd
- ITAA36 82BM(1)(a)(ii)                   v. Commissioners of Inland Revenue
- ITAA36 82BM(1)(b)                       (1951) 32 TC 513
- ITAA36 82BN(1)                       - Sun Newspapers Ltd v. FC of T
- ITAA36 82BR                             (1938) 61 CLR 337; (1938) 5 ATD
- ITAA36 Pt IVA                           87
- ITAA36 Subdiv 57-G Sch 2D
Taxation Ruling


TR 97/23
page 52 of 52                          FOI status: may be released



-   The Law Shipping Co Ltd v. The
    Commissioners of Inland Revenue
    (1923) 12 TC 621
-   The Rhodesia Railways Ltd and
    Others v. Commissioner of Taxes
    (Southern Rhodesia) [1925] 1 SAf
    TC 133
-   W Thomas & Co Pty Ltd v. FC of T
    1965) 115 CLR 58; (1965) 14 ATD
    78
-   Case 64 (1944) 11 TBRD (OS) 202
-   Case 36 (1949) 15 TBRD (OS) 287
-   (1950) 1 CTBR (NS) Case 18
-   Case B21 (1951) 2 TBRD 101
-   (1953) 3 CTBR (NS) Case 82
-   (1953) 4 CTBR (NS) Case 9
-   Case G5 (1955) 7 TBRD 29
-   (1956) 6 CTBR (NS) Case 55
-   (1959) 8 CTBR (NS) Case 137
-   (1962) 10 CTBR (NS) Case 58
-   (1962) 10 CTBR (NS) Case 84
-   Case P5 (1963) 14 TBRD 14
-   (1963) 11 CTBR (NS) Case 44
-   (1963) 11 CTBR (NS) Case 63
-   Case Q48 (1965) 15 TBRD 229
-   Case S27 (1966) 17 TBRD 163;
    (1966) 13 CTBR (NS) Case 56
-   Case T14 (1968) 18 TBRD 67
-   Case T75 (1968) 18 TBRD 377;
    (1968) 14 CTBR (NS) Case 40
-   (1972) 18 CTBR (NS) Case 14;
    Case D47 72 ATC 272
-   (1972) 18 CTBR (NS) Case 33;
    Case D64 72 ATC 390
-   (1983) 26 CTBR (NS) Case 75;
    Case Q11 83 ATC 41
-   (1983) 27 CTBR (NS) Case 26;
    Case Q98 83 ATC 487
-   (1984) 27 CTBR (NS) Case 154;
    Case R101 84 ATC 673
-   Case V167 88 ATC 1107; AAT
    Case 12 1986) 18 ATR 3056
-   Case V83 88 ATC 580; AAT Case
    4371 (1988) 19 ATR 3540
-   Case W7 89 ATC 161; AAT Case
    4845 (1988) 20 ATR 3170
-   Case W68 89 ATC 613; AAT Case
    5232 (1989) 20 ATR 3796
