                                                   Print whole section



Work-related deductions
Deductions you can claim for expenses that directly relate
to earning your employment income.



  Cars, transport and travel
  Deductions for car, transport and travel expenses you incur in the
  course of your work.




  Tools, computers and items you use for
  work
  Deductions for tools, computers, internet, stationery, books and
  other items you use for work.




  Clothes and items you wear at work
  Deductions for clothes, glasses, protective gear and other items
  you wear at work.




  Working from home expenses
  Deductions for expenses you incur as a result of working from
  home such as stationery, energy and office equipment.




  Education, training and seminars
   Deductions for self-education, conferences and training. You
   can't claim children's school fees or care.


   Personal grooming, health and fitness
   Deductions for medical assessments, vaccinations, COVID-19
   tests, gym fees, cosmetics and personal grooming.




   Standard deduction for work-related
   expenses
   The new standard deduction and other changes that apply to
   work-related expenses from the 2026–27 income year.




   Meals, entertainment and functions
   Deductions for meals, snacks, overtime meals, entertainment and
   functions.




   Memberships, accreditations, fees and
   commissions
   Deductions for union fees, professional memberships, working
   with children check, agency fees and commissions.




QC 105302



Working from home expenses
Deductions for expenses you incur as a result of working
from home such as stationery, energy and office
equipment.

Last updated 8 June 2026
Eligibility to claim
To claim working from home expenses, you must:

  work from home to fulfil your employment duties, not just carrying
  out minimal tasks, such as occasionally checking emails or taking
  calls

  incur additional running expenses because you work from home

  have records that show you incurred these expenses, for example
  receipts.

To calculate your deduction for working from home expenses, you
must use one of the methods set out below.

When incurring running expenses for both private and work purposes,
you need to apportion your deduction. You can only claim the work-
related portion as a deduction.


Media: Claiming a work from home deduction
https://tv.ato.gov.au/ato-tv/media?v=bi9or7orgeamhm        (Duration:
2:13)


Additional running expenses
Running expenses relate to the use of facilities within your home.
These expenses are generally considered private and domestic. You
can claim a deduction for additional running expenses you incur as a
direct result of working from home.

Additional running expenses may include:

  electricity or gas (energy expenses) for heating or cooling and
  lighting

  home and mobile internet or data expenses

  mobile and home phone expenses

  stationery and office supplies

  the decline in value of depreciating assets you use for work – for
  example

     office furniture such as chairs and desks
     equipment such as computers, laptops and software

  the repairs and maintenance to depreciating assets.

In limited circumstances where you have a dedicated home office, you
may also be able to claim:

  occupancy expenses (such as mortgage interest or rent)

  cleaning expenses.

If your employer pays you an allowance to cover your working from
home expenses, you must include it as income in your tax return.

If you're a sole trader or business owner and your home is your
principal place of business, see Deductions for home-based business
expenses.


Choosing a method to calculate your claim
There are 2 methods available to calculate your claim:

  Fixed rate method

     an amount per work hour for additional running expenses

     allows separate claims for expenses not covered by the fixed
     rate, such as the decline in value of depreciating assets

     doesn't require you to have a dedicated home office.

  Actual cost method

     the actual expenses you incur as a result of working from home.

You must keep records to show you incur expenses as a result of
working from home. The type of records you need to keep will depend
on the method you choose to calculate your expenses.

For a summary of this information in PDF format, see Working from
home deduction (PDF, 571 KB) .


Expenses you can't claim
You can't claim a deduction for:

  coffee, tea, milk and other general household items, even if your
  employer provides these at work
   items your employer provides – for example, a laptop or a mobile
   phone

   expenses your employer reimburses you for the cost.




   Fixed rate method
   Check your eligibility to calculate your working from home
   expenses using the fixed rate method.




   Actual cost method
   Check if you're eligible to calculate your work from home
   expenses using the actual cost method.




   Occupancy expenses
   Check if you're eligible to claim occupancy expenses when you
   work from home.




QC 72158



Fixed rate method
Check your eligibility to calculate your working from home
expenses using the fixed rate method.

Last updated 8 June 2026



Eligibility to claim
To use the fixed rate method, you must:

   incur additional running expenses as a result of working from home

   have a record of the total number of hours you work from home and
   the expenses you incur while working at home.
How it works
You can claim a fixed rate for each hour you work from home during
the relevant income year. The rate includes the additional running
expenses you incur for:

   home and mobile internet or data expenses

   mobile and home phone usage expenses

   electricity and gas (energy expenses) for heating, cooling and
   lighting

   stationery and computer consumables, such as printer ink and
   paper.

The rate per work hour includes the total deductible expenses for the
above additional running expenses. If you're using this method, you
can't claim an additional separate deduction for these expenses.


Fixed rate method
To calculate your deduction using this method, multiply the number of
hours you work from home by the hourly fixed rate in the income year.

Use the rate for the income year for which you are claiming a
deduction:

   2024–25 and 2025–26: use 70 cents per work hour

   2022–23 and 2023–24: use 67 cents per work hour

   2020–21 and 2021–22: use 52 cent per work hour.

For fixed rates and eligibility in earlier years, see Prior year tax return
forms and schedules.


How to claim expenses the fixed rate doesn't
include
You can separately claim a deduction for the work-related use of
technology and office furniture such as chairs, desks, computers,
bookshelves. These are generally depreciating assets that decline in
value over time. You can also claim the repairs and maintenance of
these items.

If the item cost $300 or less and you use it mainly to produce non-
business income, you can claim an immediate deduction for the cost in
the year you buy it. This may include items such as keyboards,
computer mouses, power boards, desk lamps and chargers.

You can claim a deduction for the decline in value of depreciating
assets over the effective life of the item, if it either:

  cost more than $300

  forms part of a set that together cost more than $300

  is identical, or substantially identical to, other items that together
  cost more than $300.

You may choose to work out the decline in value of low-cost assets
and low-value assets with a cost or opening adjustable value of less
than $1,000 through a low-value pool. You calculate decline in value of
depreciating assets in a low-value pool using a diminishing value rate.
You can't allocate depreciating assets that cost $300 or less to a low-
value pool if they are used mainly to produce non-business income
and you can claim an immediate deduction for them.

Where you use your depreciating assets for both work and private
purposes, you need to apportion your decline in value deduction. You
can only claim the work-related portion as a deduction. In limited
circumstances where you have a dedicated home office, you may also
be able to claim:

  occupancy expenses (such as mortgage interest or rent)

  cleaning expenses (such as the cost of cleaning that relates to the
  work-related use of a room in your house set up as a home office).

For more information about the deductions allowable for 'home office'
expenses, see PCG 2023/1 Claiming a deduction for additional running
expenses incurred while working from home – ATO compliance
approach



  Example: no additional deduction as expense
  covered by fixed rate
  Keisha is an employee engineer. During 2025–26, Keisha works
  from home and uses her timesheets to record the hours she
  spends working from home.

  At the end of the income year, Keisha works out that she worked
  at home for a total of 843 hours.
  When she is working from home, Keisha incurs electricity
  expenses, internet expenses and mobile phone expenses.
  However, Keisha also uses her mobile phone for work purposes
  on days when she is not working from home.

  If Keisha uses the fixed rate method to calculate her working
  from home expenses deduction, she can claim a deduction of
  $590 (843 hours × 70c) in her 2025–26 tax return.

  Keisha can't claim a separate deduction in her tax return for the
  mobile phone expenses she incurs when she's not working from
  home as the rate per work hour includes this expense.

  If Keisha wants to claim all of her work-related mobile phone
  expenses, she will need to use the actual costs method to
  calculate her claim for working from home expenses.




Calculate your deduction
Use our home office expenses calculator to help work out your
deduction.


  Home office expenses calculator


You can also calculate your deduction manually using the steps below.


Steps for calculating your work from home
deduction manually
Before you calculate your deduction, check you have all the records
you are required to keep.

Step 1: Work out the total number of hours you worked
from home
Work out the total number of hours you worked from home during the
income year using your records – for example, your timesheets,
rosters, diary or similar document you keep at the same time as when
you work.

Step 2: Multiply your total work from home hours by the
rate per hour
Multiply the total number of hours worked from home during the year
by the rate per hour (70 cents for the 2025–26 income year).

Step 3: Work out the decline in value of depreciating
assets used for working from home
Calculate the work-related decline in value of any depreciating assets
that you used to work from home during the income year.

Use our Depreciation and capital allowances tool to help work this out.

For more information, see Depreciating assets you use for work.

Step 4: Work out the amount of any other working from
home expenses you incurred that the rate per hour
doesn't cover
Use your records to work out the amount of any other work-related
expenses you incurred as a result of working from home.

Don't include any amount for expenses the rate per work hour covers.

Step 5: Add the amounts at step 2, step 3 and step 4
together
The total of step 2, step 3 and step 4 (with the cents disregarded not
rounded) is the amount you claim as a working from home deduction in
your tax return.



  Example: deduction calculated using fixed rate method

  Yang is employed as a software engineer. On 6 December 2025,
  Yang starts working from home 2 days a week and at the office
  3 days a week.

  On 1 December 2025, Yang buys a desk for $250 and an office
  chair for $299. Yang only uses the desk and office chair when
  working from home. He keeps his receipt for both items.

  When working from home, Yang uses his work laptop, his
  personal internet connection and his personal mobile phone.
  Yang also uses the air conditioner in his spare room to cool and
  heat the room he works in.

  Yang uses a spreadsheet to record the time he starts and
  finishes working from home. Yang also keeps one quarterly
  invoice for his electricity expenses, one monthly internet bill and
  one monthly mobile phone bill for the period between
  6 December 2025 and 30 June 2026.

  At the end of the 2025–26 income year, Yang decides to use the
  fixed rate method to calculate his working from home deduction.
  Yang calculates his deduction manually as follows:

  1. Yang uses his spreadsheet to calculate that he worked from
     home for a total of 567 hours.

  2. Yang calculates his deduction for electricity, mobile phone and
     internet by multiplying the total number of hours he worked
     from home by the hourly rate.
     His calculation is:
     567 hours × 70c per work hour = $396.90

  3. Yang works out his decline in value deduction.
     As the desk and office chair Yang bought cost less than $300
     each and he only uses them when he works from home, he
     can claim the cost of the desk and the office chair as a decline
     in value deduction for the 2025–26 income year.
     His deduction is:
     Chair – $299
     Desk – $250

  4. Yang has no other expenses.

  5. Yang calculates his total deduction by adding the amount he
     calculated at Step 2 and Step 3.
     This is calculated as:
     $396.90 + $299 + $250 = $945.90

  When he lodges his 2025–26 tax return, Yang includes a
  deduction of $945 (that is, $945.90 with the cents disregarded
  not rounded) for his working from home expenses.




Record keeping for the fixed rate method
To claim your working from home deduction using this method, you
must keep:

  a record of the number of actual hours you work from home during
  the entire income year – for example, a timesheet, roster, diary or
  other similar document (an estimate of your hours won't be
  acceptable)

  at least one record for each of the additional running expenses you
  incur that the rate per work hour includes – for example, if you
  incurred electricity and stationery expenses keep one quarterly bill
  for your electricity expenses and one receipt for your stationery
  expenses

You need to keep your records for 5 years (in most cases) from the
date you lodge your tax return.

You must keep records for depreciating assets from the time you buy
them, that shows:

  the amount spent on depreciating assets you buy

  the percentage of the year you use your depreciating assets
  exclusively for work, such as a diary or similar document.

You must also keep these records for other running expenses you are
claiming as a separate deduction.

You need to keep these records for 5 years from the date of your last
claim for decline in value.



  Example: estimate of hours worked from home
  for part of the income year
  Wanda has an agreement with her employer to work from home
  one day a week. She is required to work 8 hours each working
  day (40 hours per week). Wanda sits at her kitchen table when
  she works at home and uses her employer provided laptop and
  mobile phone. Wanda uses her own internet connection and
  electricity.

  Wanda keeps one monthly internet bill and a quarterly electricity
  bill but she doesn't keep any records of the hours she spent
  working from home during the period from 1 July 2025 to
  28 February 2026.

  Wanda estimates the hours she worked from home during this
  period as 280 hours using:

     8 hours per day × 1 day per week working from home
     35 weeks (rounded up from 34 weeks and 4 days).

  At the end of February 2025, Wanda finds out that she needs to
  keep a record of the hours she works at home at the time she
  works them if she wants to use the fixed rate method.

  For the period from 1 March 2026 to 30 June 2026, Wanda keeps
  a record in her email calendar of when she starts and finishes
  work (including any breaks) on the day she works from home
  each week. At the end of the 2025–26 income year, Wanda
  calculates the hours she worked from home during this 4-month
  period as 136 hours.

  Wanda can claim a deduction for her working from home
  expenses using the fixed rate method because she has kept
  records of:

     the expenses she incurred which are covered by the rate per
     hour, that is, her electricity and internet expenses

     a record of the actual hours she worked from home during the
     period 1 March 2026 to 30 June 2026.

  Wanda calculates deduction as:

      136 × 70c = $95 (with cents disregarded, not rounded).

  Wanda can't include the hours she worked from home during the
  period from 1 July 2025 to 28 February 2026. This is because
  Wanda estimated the hours worked from home during this part of
  the year and estimates of hours worked from home are not
  accepted. Only a record kept at the time the hours are worked
  from home is acceptable.


You can use the myDeductions tool in the ATO app to keep track of
your expenses and receipts throughout the year.


  myDeductions tool




QC 72159
Actual cost method
Check if you're eligible to calculate your work from home
expenses using the actual cost method.

Last updated 8 June 2026



Eligibility to claim
To use the actual cost method to claim actual expenses, you must:

   incur additional running expenses as a result of working from home

   keep records or other written evidence, which shows the amount

      you spend on expenses

      you spend on depreciating assets you buy and use while working
      from home

      of work-related use for your expenses and depreciating assets.

You don't incur additional running expenses if other members of your
household (who are not working from home) are in the same room as
you while you are working from home.



   Example: working from a lounge room
   Lee works from her lounge room while her partner and 3 children
   watch television. Lee isn't incurring any additional costs for
   lighting, heating or cooling as a result of working in that room, so
   she can't claim a deduction for them.




How it works
Using the actual costs method, you work out your deduction by
calculating the actual additional expenses you incur when working
from home. This includes expenses you incur for:

   the decline in value of depreciating assets – for example, home
   office furniture (desk, chair) and furnishings, phones and
   computers, laptops or similar devices
  electricity and gas (energy expenses) for heating, cooling and
  lighting

  home and mobile phone, data and internet expenses

  stationery and computer consumables, such as printer ink and
  paper

  cleaning your dedicated home office.

Where you incur running expenses for both private and work purposes,
you need to apportion your deduction on a fair and reasonable basis.
You can only claim the work-related portion as a deduction.

In limited circumstances, you may also be able to claim occupancy
expenses (such as mortgage interest or rent).


Decline in value of depreciating assets
If the item cost $300 or less and you use it mainly for a work-related
purpose, you can claim an immediate deduction for its cost in the year
you buy it.

You can claim a deduction for the decline in value of depreciating
assets over the effective life of the item, if it either:

  cost more than $300

  forms part of a set that together cost more than $300.

You may choose to work out the decline in value of low-cost assets
and low-value assets with a cost or opening adjustable value of less
than $1,000 through a low-value pool. You calculate decline in value of
depreciating assets in a low-value pool using a diminishing value rate.

If you use the asset for work and private purposes, you can only claim
the work-related portion of the decline in value as a deduction.

For example, if you buy a device for $289 that you use 80% of the time
for work-related purposes and 20% of the time for private purposes,
you can only claim a deduction of $231 (80% × $289) in the income
year you buy it.

You can use the depreciation and capital allowances tool to calculate
your deduction for the decline in value of equipment, furniture and
furnishings.
To claim a deduction for the decline in value of depreciating assets,
you must:

  keep receipts showing the amount you spent on the assets

  show the percentage of the year you used those depreciating
  assets exclusively for work.

Cleaning expenses
If you have a dedicated home office, work out the cost of your
cleaning expenses and apportion your claim for any:

  private use of your home office

  use of the home office by other members of your household.

For example, if you have a room set up as a home office, add together
your receipts for cleaning expenses and multiply by the floor area of
the dedicated work area, divided by the whole floor area of the house.
Then reduce this amount by the percentage of private use by yourself
and the use of the home office by other household members.

Electricity and gas for heating, cooling and lighting
You can work out the cost of your electricity and gas (energy
expenses) for heating, cooling and lighting by using the:

  cost per unit of power you use (your utility bill has this information)

  average units you use per hour, which is the power consumption
  (this information may be found in the manufacturer information, the
  star energy rating label or by searching the internet) and is

     per kilowatt (kw) hour for each electrical appliance, equipment or
     light you use

     per megajoule (MJ) hour for gas heating appliances you use

  total annual hours used for work-related purposes by checking your
  record of hours worked or your diary.



  Example: electricity for cooling and heating
  Ben works at home several days per week and keeps a record of
  the total hours he works from home. His record shows he worked
  a total of 768 hours from home in 2025–26.
  When he works from home, Ben sits in a separate room of his
  house and always uses the air conditioner in the room when he is
  working. Based on the manufacturer's information, his air
  conditioning unit costs 1.09 kw per hour to run.

  Based on his electricity bills, Ben pays 27.81c per kw hour (28c
  rounded up) for electricity.

  Ben calculates the cost of cooling and heating for the room he
  uses when he is working from home as:

       1.09 kw per hour × 0.28c per hour = 30.52c per kw hour

       768 hours × 30.52c = $234.39.

  Ben can also use the online home office expenses calculator to
  work out his actual expenses. Ben would fill out the following:

     Select income year: 2025–26

     Do you want to claim a deduction based on actual expenses?:
     Yes

     Choose one of the following methods to calculate electricity
     expenses: Actual running expenses

     Cost per unit of electricity used: 0.28c

     Average units of electricity used per hour for income
     producing purposes: 1.09 kw

     Hours of electricity used for income producing purposes
     during the year: 768.



Phone, data and internet
If you receive an itemised phone or internet bill, you need to work out
your work-related use over a continuous 4-week period. You can use
your work-related percentage for the 4-week period to work out your
expenses for the whole income year.

For example, you can mark your work-related calls on your monthly
phone bill and work out your work-related use based on the number of
those phone calls compared to your total calls.

For more information, see PS LA 2001/6 Verification approaches for
electronic device usage expenses.
Stationery and computer consumables
Work out the cost of computer consumables and stationery by using
receipts for the items you buy. If you use the item for both private and
work-related purposes, you can only claim the work-related portion of
the expense.


Calculate your deduction
Use our home office expenses calculator to help work out your
deduction.


  Home office expenses calculator




Record keeping for actual costs method
To claim your work from home expenses using actual costs, you must
keep:

  either a record showing

     the number of actual hours you work from home during the entire
     income year – for example, a timesheet or spreadsheet

     a continuous 4-week period that represents your usual pattern of
     working at home – for example, a diary.

You must also keep records that show:

  the additional running expenses you incurred while working from
  home, such as receipts, bills and other documents

  how you worked out the amount of your deduction.

You can use the myDeductions tool in the ATO app to keep track of
your expenses and receipts throughout the year.


  myDeductions
QC 72161



Occupancy expenses
Check if you're eligible to claim occupancy expenses when
you work from home.

Last updated 8 June 2026




Occupancy expenses for employees
As an employee working from home, generally:

   you can't claim occupancy expenses

   you can claim running expenses.

If you acquired your home after 20 September 1985 and you are
eligible to claim occupancy expenses, there are capital gains tax (CGT)
implications for your home. There are no CGT implications if you only
claim running expenses.

See deductions for home-based business expenses if you operate a
business from your home.

Occupancy expenses are expenses that you pay to own or rent your
home. These include:

   mortgage interest

   rent

   council and water rates

   land taxes

   house insurance premiums.

If you're eligible to claim occupancy expenses, you can also claim
running expenses you incur.


Eligibility to claim
You can only claim occupancy expenses if you have an area of your
home set aside that has the character of a 'place of business' and you
can show all the following :

  the nature of your income earning activities requires you to have a
  place of business

  it was necessary for you to work from home because your employer
  doesn't provide you with an alternative place of business (as
  opposed to your employer allowing you to work from another
  location)

  the area of your home that you use for work is exclusively or almost
  exclusively used for work purposes and isn't readily capable of
  being used for any other purpose.

Indicators that the area of your home you've set aside to work from
may be a place of business include:

  the area is clearly identifiable as a place of business

  the area isn’t readily capable of being used for private or domestic
  purposes

  the area is exclusively or almost exclusively used for carrying on a
  business

  the area is used regularly for visits of clients or customers.

You can't claim occupancy expenses if your employer provides you
with a place to work.



  Example: employer provides place of work
  Priya currently lives in Albury and is employed as a salesperson
  for the southern New South Wales region. She is offered a
  promotion to the area sales manager position for Victoria by her
  employer. The job is based at her employer's Geelong office but
  they are flexible so they allow Priya to work from her home in
  Albury.

  As Priya’s employer provides her with an office to work from, she
  can't claim occupancy expenses. It is Priya's personal choice to
  live in Albury.




Calculate your occupancy expenses
Occupancy expenses can generally be apportioned on a floor area
basis. You must also apportion your expenses on a time basis if you
only use that area of your home for work purposes for part of the year.



  Example: occupancy expenses deductible
  Abdul is employed as the on-site manager in a large townhouse
  complex. As the on-site manager, his duties include being
  available to deal with issues that arise on-site or that are raised
  by residents, manage the townhouses in the complex that are
  rented out by the owners, attend to the gardening, repairs and
  maintenance issues for the complex and provide monthly reports
  to the body corporate.

  As the onsite manager, Abdul must be available from 9:00 am to
  5:00 pm each weekday and from 9 am to noon on weekends.
  Outside of these times Abdul must be available to attend to
  emergencies.

  He lives on-site and rents a townhouse for discounted rate of
  $400 per week which has a separate small room at the front set
  up as an office. The room is 6m² and Abdul's townhouse is
  120m². Residents, tradespeople and anyone else coming onto
  the complex to attend to an issue go to the office to speak to
  Abdul in the first instance.

  The office has a:

     lockable glass sliding door at the front and a lockable door at
     the back of the office which leads to the rest of his townhouse

     counter installed with a built-in desk, filing cabinets and a
     photocopier behind the counter

     large sign outside out the front indicating that the on-site
     manager's office is located there.

  Abdul's employer provides a computer, mobile phone and printer
  for him to use while he is working.

  As the office is small and is mainly taken up with a with the built-
  in counter, desk and other office equipment, Abdul doesn’t use
  the room for non-work purposes. When he finishes working for
  the day, he locks the front door of the office and the door
  leading to the rest of his townhouse.
Abdul can claim a deduction for a portion of his occupancy
expenses as a result of working from his home because:

  his income earning activities require him to have a place of
  business for residents of the complex, tradespeople and other
  contractors to discuss matters with him and to deal with any
  issues with arise on-site

  his employer doesn't provide him with an alternative place of
  business to work from

  it is necessary for him to work from the office set up in his
  townhouse so that he is onsite when required

  the room he works from is used exclusively for work purposes
  and it is not readily capable of being used for any other
  purpose due to the built-in counter, desk and other office
  equipment.

Abdul's rent expenses for the 2025–26 income year are $20,800
($400 × 52 weeks).

Abdul calculates his deduction for occupancy expenses as
follows:

    Total occupancy expenses × floor area percentage

    $20,800 × 5% = $1,040.




Example: occupancy expenses not deductible
Randy’s employer decides to permanently close the office he
currently works from before their shutdown in mid-December
2025. From January 2026, Randy works from home in either his
lounge room at a desk or at the dining table. As Randy only
needs a laptop and a mobile phone, he doesn’t have a room set
aside to work from.

Randy can’t claim a deduction for any portion of his occupancy
expenses.
  Even though his employer hasn’t provided him with a work
  location and it is necessary for him to work from home, he
  doesn’t have an area of his home set aside to use exclusively, or
  almost exclusively, for income producing purposes. His dining
  room and lounge room are also readily capable of being used,
  and are used regularly, for private purposes.

  Randy also doesn't have an area of his home set aside as a 'place
  of business'.




Record keeping for occupancy expenses
You must keep records for all of your occupancy expenses, including:

  bank statements for your mortgage interest

  rental receipts

  quarterly invoices for your water and council rates

  invoices or receipts for your house insurance

  land tax assessment notices and evidence of payment

  a floor plan of your home with the floor area used when working
  from home clearly marked

  records of time spent using the area for a purpose other than
  working from home

  records showing how you apportioned your occupancy expenses.

You must also keep records for the property, including:

  the purchase and sale contract for your home

  records of any incidental expenses you incur on the purchase and
  sale of your home – for example, real estate agent commission and
  stamp duty

  records of the occupancy expenses for every year you claim them.

If you become eligible to claim occupancy expenses sometime after
you buy your home and you're eligible to claim a deduction for interest
expenses, you won't be eligible for the full main residence exemption.
It doesn't matter whether you actually had a home loan or whether you
claimed a deduction for interest, your main residence exemption will
still be affected. However, there are special rules around the cost of
your home in these circumstances. As such, you should get a market
valuation for your house at the time you first start using it for income
producing purposes.

These records must be kept for the entire period that you own your
home and for at least 5 years after you sell it.

Find out more about how your home may be affected if you use your
home in earning your income.




QC 72163



Standard deduction for work-
related expenses
The new standard deduction and other changes that apply
to work-related expenses from the 2026–27 income year.

Last updated 14 September 2026




            Not available for Tax Time 2025–26
            The standard deduction is not available for Tax Time
            2025–26.




About the standard deduction
From the 2026–27 income year, eligible taxpayers are entitled to a
standard deduction (also referred to as the 'instant tax deduction') of
up to $1,000 for work-related expenses, without needing to have spent
the money or kept records.

This deduction first applies in your 2026–27 tax return. It doesn't apply
in the 2025–26 tax return.


How the standard deduction works
The standard deduction:

  is a default work-related expense claim that will be automatically
  applied in your tax return if you're eligible

  reduces your taxable income

  isn't a tax offset or rebate

  is reduced by any work-related expenses you claim in your tax
  return that are covered by the standard deduction.

For more information, see Draft Law Companion Ruling LCR 2026/D5
The standard deduction for work-related expenses.


Eligibility for the standard deduction
You're eligible for the standard deduction if you:

  are an individual

  are an Australian resident for tax purposes

  earn 'assessable labour income', which includes

     salary and wages

     director fees and office holder payments

     payments to religious practitioners

     return-to-work payments

     termination and retirement payments

     parental leave pay.

The standard deduction will not apply if you only earn other types of
income such as dividend income or business income.


Receiving the standard deduction
If you're eligible for the standard deduction:

  you don't need to do anything to claim the deduction

  we'll automatically apply it to your tax return from the 2026–27
  income year onwards based on the information in your return.
How your standard deduction is calculated
The maximum standard deduction you may be entitled to is the lower
of $1,000 or the amount of your total assessable labour income.

If your total assessable labour income is:

  $1,000 or more, your maximum standard deduction is $1,000

  less than $1,000, your maximum standard deduction will be the total
  amount of assessable labour income you earned during the income
  year.

Your maximum standard deduction gets reduced by certain work-
related expenses you claim in your tax return.



  Example 1: a mix of incomes
  Simon is an Australian resident for tax purposes. During the
  2026–27 income year he:

     earns wages of $400 from casual work (this is his assessable
     labour income)

     receives $40,000 from dividends, interest and other
     investment income.

  Although Simon’s total assessable income is $40,400, his
  maximum standard deduction is limited to $400. This is because
  his total assessable labour income is $400.




Work-related expenses that reduce the
standard deduction
Certain work-related expenses you claim in your tax return reduce the
amount of your standard deduction. These include:

  expenses related to earning assessable labour income, such as
  stationery, tolls, travel allowance expenses, uniform, laundry and
  working from home expenses

  car expenses related to earning assessable labour income
  transport expenses incurred between 2 or more separate
  workplaces (provided none of the workplaces is your home and you
  earn assessable labour income at one of them)

  balancing adjustment deductions on assets used to earn assessable
  labour income

  COVID-19 test expenses.

If you're eligible for the standard deduction and you:

  don't claim work-related expenses that reduce the standard
  deduction in your tax return, you automatically receive your
  maximum standard deduction – see example 2

  claim work-related expenses that reduce the standard deduction in
  your tax return, your standard deduction is reduced dollar for dollar
  – see example 2 and may be reduced to nil – see example 3.



  Example 2: less than $1,000 in work-related
  expenses
  Yui works for an advertising agency, earning $95,000 per year in
  wages. At the end of the 2026–27 income year, Yui incurred the
  following work-related expenses:

     $200 in working from home expenses

     $200 for a work-related training course

     $150 for travelling from her workplace to visit clients.

  She also made a $50 donation to a deductible gift recipient
  (DGR) registered charity and paid $175 to her tax agent to
  complete her previous year's tax return.

  Yui is entitled to a $1,000 standard deduction because she is an
  Australian resident for tax purposes and her income was earned
  from wages.

  Her work-related expenses of $550 are less than the
  $1,000 standard deduction. Yui has 2 options.

  Option 1 – Don't claim the work-related expenses
If Yui doesn't claim her work-related expenses of $550 in her
2026–27 tax return, she'll receive the full $1,000 standard
deduction. She doesn't need to keep records for these expenses.

Option 2 – Claim the work-related expenses
If Yui chooses to claim the $550 in work-related expenses, she:

  must have records to support her claim for $550 of work-
  related expenses

  is still entitled to the standard deduction, however it is
  reduced by the amount of the $550 work-related expenses
  claimed in her tax return. The standard deduction she'll
  receive is $450 ($1,000 − $550). She doesn't need to report
  the $450 standard deduction amount, as it will be
  automatically included in her tax return.

In these circumstances, it's easier for Yui to not claim the $550 in
work-related expenses.

With both options, Yui can still claim a deduction for her
donation of $50 and her tax agent fees of $175 in her tax return,
as these aren't covered by the standard deduction. Yui needs
records to support these expense claims.




Example 3: work‑related expenses over $1,000
Marco spends $3,500 in work-related expenses (that reduce the
standard deduction) over the 2026–27 income year.

While he's eligible for a $1,000 standard deduction for 2026–27,
he chooses to claim all his $3,500 work-related expenses in his
tax return and provide written evidence to support his claim. This
ensures he gets the full tax deduction he is entitled to.

Marco won't receive a standard deduction because his work-
related expense claims are above $1,000, therefore his standard
deduction is reduced to nil.
Work-related expenses not affecting the
standard deduction
There are work-related expenses that don't reduce the amount of your
standard deduction. You should claim the following expenses in your
tax return:

  union fees

  memberships of a trade, business or professional association.

You must have the required records to support your claims, such as
statements of the fees or subscriptions you paid.


Other deductions not affecting the
standard deduction
You need to claim all other tax deductions you're entitled to in your tax
return as usual, such as:

  gifts and donations

  investment and rental property deductions

  the cost of managing your tax affairs

  personal super contributions

  income protection, personal sickness or accident insurance
  premiums

  expenses you incur in earning other types of income, such as
  business or from providing services through a digital platform.


Record keeping
If you expect your total work-related expenses that reduce your
standard deduction to be:

  more than the maximum standard deduction you're entitled to –
  then if you want to claim the amounts as a deduction you need to
  keep the required records for all work-related expenses you're
  entitled to. However, you can choose not to claim these deductions
  and instead receive the standard deduction you're entitled to.
   Choosing to receive the standard deduction means you don’t need
   to keep records for those expenses.

   less than the maximum standard deduction you are entitled to, it’s
   not necessary but still a good idea to keep records. Unexpected
   costs can occur, which may increase your total work-related
   expenses.

You need to keep records for:

   work-related expenses you claim in your tax return

   union fees, subscriptions to trade, business or professional
   associations

   income protection, personal sickness or accident insurance
   premiums

   all other deductions you claim, such as investment expenses or
   donations.

There are other changes to record keeping from 1 July 2026, because
of the standard deduction, see removal of record keeping exceptions.


Additional changes due to the standard
deduction
Due to the standard deduction for work-related expenses, there are
additional changes that apply from the 2026–27 income year.


Removal of record keeping exceptions
From 1 July 2026, the following record keeping exceptions won't apply:

   $300 deduction limit for work-related expenses

   $150 laundry expense limit

   award transport expense exemption

This applies to all taxpayers, regardless of eligibility for the standard
deduction.

If you choose to claim more than your maximum standard deduction,
you must have written evidence (such as a receipt) for all work-related
expenses you claim in your tax return for the 2026–27 and later income
years.
Laundry expenses
If you incur laundry expenses and claim a deduction for them in your
return, we will accept the following amounts for working out your
laundry expenses deduction:

   $1 per load if you only wash your work clothes in that load

   50c per load if you mix other clothes with your work clothes.

For more information, see the compliance approach contained in Draft
Law Companion Ruling LCR 2026/D5 The standard deduction for
work-related expenses.

Low value pool
For the 2026–2027 and later income years, you can't add a
depreciating asset to a low-value pool if, when you acquired it, you
expected to mainly use it to earn assessable labour income. You can
still claim the decline in value of the depreciating asset. However, the
decline in value claim for depreciating assets used to earn assessable
labour income in an income year will reduce any standard deduction
you're entitled to.

This change applies regardless of eligibility for the standard deduction.

It doesn't affect:

   existing assets in a low-value pool

   other depreciating assets (such as business assets) not used to
   earn assessable labour income.

Balancing adjustments
From the 2026–27 income year, there is a simple way to work out your
balancing adjustment amount if you:

   sell, dispose of or stop using a depreciating asset that's used at any
   time for the purpose of gaining or producing your assessable labour
   income

   received a partial or full standard deduction in one or more years in
   which you held the asset.

You have the option of using a fixed 50% rate to calculate the
reduction of either of the following amounts that arose because you
stopped holding or using the asset:
     the amount you include in your assessable income

     the amount you can deduct from your assessable income.

  This simplifies calculations where detailed records of an asset's use
  were not kept. If you claim a balancing adjustment deduction related to
  an asset used to produce your assessable labour income, it reduces
  the amount of your standard deduction in that income year.

  For more information on balancing adjustments, see What happens if
  you no longer hold or use a depreciating asset.




  QC 107752



Our commitment to you
We are committed to providing you with accurate, consistent and clear
information to help you understand your rights and entitlements and meet
your obligations.

If you follow our information and it turns out to be incorrect, or it is
misleading and you make a mistake as a result, we will take that into
account when determining what action, if any, we should take.

Some of the information on this website applies to a specific financial year.
This is clearly marked. Make sure you have the information for the right year
before making decisions based on that information.

If you feel that our information does not fully cover your circumstances, or
you are unsure how it applies to you, contact us or seek professional
advice.

Copyright notice
© Australian Taxation Office for the Commonwealth of Australia

You are free to copy, adapt, modify, transmit and distribute this material as
you wish (but not in any way that suggests the ATO or the Commonwealth
endorses you or any of your services or products).
