                                                     Print whole section



Working as an employee
Check what tax applies to your different employee
payments and what to do when you leave your job or the
workforce.



  Tax for employees
  How tax works on employee income, including how to set up your
  super and what your employer must do.




  Salary sacrificing for employees
  Find out what salary sacrificing is, how to set up an effective
  arrangement and the tax implications of an arrangement.




  Reportable fringe benefits for employees
  Find out if fringe benefits you receive are reportable and may
  affect your obligations and government benefits.




  Income statements
  Find out how to access your end of year income statement and
  what to do if its missing, incorrect, or not tax ready.




  Leaving your job
  Find out about payments made to you when you leave your job,
  including redundancy and employment termination payments.




  Leaving the workforce
   If you're leaving the workforce because you are retiring, there are
   a range of options for making the transition.


   Receiving cash for work you do
   If you're paid in cash, check you are getting the correct amounts
   and that your employer is paying super.




   Workplace giving programs for
   employees
   Find out what a workplace giving program is, how to donate, and
   responsibilities your employer has.




   Worker entitlement funds
   If you are a member of a worker entitlement fund, you need to be
   aware of the tax treatment of payments from the fund.




QC 43436



Tax for employees
How tax works on employee income, including how to set
up your super and what your employer must do.

Last updated 27 June 2026



Starting your job
When you start a job, you need to make sure that you:

   have or apply for a tax file number (TFN) – without a TFN you pay
   more tax on your income

   complete a TFN declaration

   choose a super fund where your employer can pay your super
   contributions.

When you're working as an employee, you must pay income tax on
payments you receive from your employer. Your employer deducts tax
from your pay and sends those amounts to us.

We produce tax tables and calculators to help your employer work out
how much to withhold from your payments. You can also use the Tax
withheld calculator    to check how much tax should be withheld from
your pay.

At the end of the income year, most employees need to lodge a tax
return. When you lodge a tax return you include how much money you
earn (income) and any expenses you can claim as a deduction.

You may receive a refund after claiming any deductible expenses.


What your employer must do
Your employer withholds tax on your behalf from your salary or wages
and, in most cases, pays super into your super account. Your employer
uses your TFN declaration to work out how much tax to withhold from
your pay.

Most employers now report your income, tax and super information at
the same time they pay you. This reporting is called Single Touch
Payroll (STP).

Your income statement will include the tax and super information your
employer reports to us. Most employers have until 14 July to finalise
their data, they will let you know if there are any delays in the
finalisation of your income statement.

You need to link your myGov account to the ATO to access your
income statement. If you don’t have a myGov account you will be able
to contact us for a copy.

Some employees receive fringe benefits as part of a salary sacrifice
arrangement. Fringe benefits are a non-cash benefit either you or an
associate, such as your spouse or children, receive because of your
employment. Your employer usually provides these benefits or
sometimes your employer's associate or a third party under an
arrangement with your employer provide the benefit.

Your employer should provide a workplace free of unlawful
discrimination and promote diversity. If you’re a working parent, have
carer responsibilities or a disability, you should discuss ways your
employer can support you. To find out more about these
responsibilities, see Australian Human Rights Commission .


Paying tax on your income
You pay income tax on most sources of income including:

  your salary and wages

  most Centrelink payments

  investment income you receive from rent, bank interest or dividends

  profits from selling shares, property or crypto assets
  income from your business.

The amount of income tax and the tax rate you pay depends on your
circumstances and how much you earn. The more you earn, the higher
your rate of tax.

Your employer and other payers use the information you provide on
your tax file number declaration to work out how much tax to withhold.

A simple way of working out how much tax should be withheld from
your pay is to use the Tax withheld calculator .

You can also use the PAYG withholding tax tables to calculate the
amount that should be withheld from your pay.

If you're an Australian resident, the first $18,200 you earn is usually tax
free. You can choose to claim the tax-free threshold when you
complete your TFN declaration.

If you earn income from more than one source (for example, from a
second job or a taxable pension) you need to tell your second payer to
withhold tax at the higher rate. You can tell the payer by selecting the
'no tax-free threshold' rate on the TFN declaration. If you don’t have
tax withheld at the higher rate you might have a tax debt (bill) to pay
when you lodge your tax return.

If you want to know the amount of tax you will be liable for over the full
year, see Tax rates – Australian residents.

Australian residents may also pay the Medicare levy. This is generally
2% of your taxable income in addition to the tax withheld from your
income. The Medicare levy helps fund some of the costs of Australia's
public health system known as Medicare.

You also need to include on your TFN declaration if you have a debt for
a:

  Higher Education Loan Program (HELP)

  Student Start-up Loan (SSL)

  Australian Apprenticeship Support Loan (AASL)

  VET Student Loan (VSL)

  Student Financial Supplement Scheme (SFSS).

Depending on how much you earn, you may have to make repayments
on this debt as part of your income tax payment.


Super contributions
Your employer may also need to pay super contributions into your
super account for you.
When you start working you should:

   choose a super fund where your employer can pay your super
   contributions (if you are eligible)

   make sure that your super fund has your tax file number (TFN), this
   will

      minimise the tax you pay on your super contributions

      ensure they accept the contribution payments

      make it easier for you and them to keep track of your super
      accounts.

If you’re eligible to choose a super fund, you can do so using the
Superannuation standard choice form. Your employer must give you
this form within 28 days of starting your employment.

If you don’t choose a super fund, your employer will pay super to your
existing super fund (called a stapled super fund).

A stapled super fund is an existing super account which is linked, or
'stapled', to an individual employee so that it follows them as they
change jobs.

If you don't have a stapled super fund your employer will pay your
super into an employer default fund they choose.

If you change jobs or have more than one job, be sure to keep track of
your super. Having multiple super accounts could mean you are paying
fees you are unaware of, which could reduce your retirement savings.

Use the YourSuper Comparison Tool to compare super products and
choose a super fund that meets your needs.




QC 103969



Salary sacrificing for employees
Find out what salary sacrificing is, how to set up an
effective arrangement and the tax implications of an
arrangement.

Last updated 11 August 2026




What is salary sacrificing?
Salary sacrificing is also known as salary packaging or total
remuneration packaging. You and your employer agree for you to
receive less income before tax and in return your employer pays for
certain benefits of similar value for you. This means you pay less tax
on your income.

A salary sacrifice arrangement reduces your taxable income, meaning
you may pay less tax on your income.

We don't provide advice on entering or rejecting a salary sacrifice
arrangement. You should seek financial advice before entering into a
salary sacrifice arrangement.


Benefits you can include in the
arrangement
There is no restriction on the types of benefits you can include in a
salary sacrifice arrangement. The important thing is that these
benefits form part of your remuneration. The benefits replace what you
would otherwise receive as salary.

Fringe benefits
Some of the benefits you can include in a salary sacrifice arrangement
are fringe benefits. Your employer will have to pay fringe benefits tax
(FBT) on the value of the benefit they provide you. If your employer
must pay FBT, they may ask you to make an employee contribution to
reduce the FBT they have to pay.

Common fringe benefits include:

  cars

  goods

  shares

  payment of your expenses such as loan repayments, school fees
  and childcare costs.



  Example: salary sacrifice of a motor vehicle
  Sam earns $65,000 a year and is considering entering into an
  effective salary sacrifice arrangement.

  Under this arrangement, his employer will provide the use of a
  $35,000 car and pay all the associated running expenses of
  $11,500. The $11,500 running expenses includes registration,
  which is GST-free.

  The GST-exclusive value of the car expenses is $10,509. A flat
  statutory rate of 20% applies for FBT purposes, regardless of the
  distance travelled.
The salary packaging provider calculates that:

  the taxable value of the car fringe benefit will be
  $7,000 (which is the cost of the car multiplied by the statutory
  rate, in this case $35,000 × 0.20 = $7,000) and

  Sam will sacrifice

     $17,353 if no employee contributions are made

     $4,145 if employee contributions of $7,000 are made.

The following table illustrates how salary sacrificing and
employee contributions work, by comparing the net disposable
income for Sam in 3 scenarios for 2025–26:

1. no salary sacrifice arrangement

2. a salary sacrifice arrangement without any employee
   contributions

3. a salary sacrifice arrangement where employee contributions
   are provided.


Table: Comparing net disposable income for 3 salary sacrifice
scenarios

                                           2. Salary + car           3. Salary + c
                       1. Salary only
  Calculation                              (without employee         (with employ
                       (no packaging)
                                           contributions)            contribution


  Annual                   $65,000.00                $65,000.00          $65,000
  remuneration


  Less salary                        nil             $17,353.00            $4,145
  sacrifice


  Taxable                  $65,000.00                $47,647.00           $60,855
  income


  Less income              $10,288.00                  $5,082.10           $9,044
  tax (2025–26
  rates)


  Less 2%                   $1,300.00                   $952.94             $1,21
  Medicare


  Income after             $53,412.00                 $41,611.96         $50,593
  tax and
     salary
     sacrifice
     amount


     Less                              nil                       nil     $7,000
     employee
     contribution


     Less car                 $11,500.00                         nil
     expenses


     Net                      $41,912.00                $41,611.96      $43,593
     disposable
     income


     Reportable                        nil               $13,207.60
                                                 (car fringe benefit
     fringe
                                                   taxable value of
     benefits                                     $7,000 × 1.8868)
     amount for
     employee's
     income
     statement or
     payment
     summary




Exempt work-related benefits
Your employer won't have to pay FBT on exempt work-related items,
such as:

  a portable electronic device

  computer software

  protective clothing

  a briefcase

  a tool of trade.

Changes from 1 April 2027
From 1 April 2027, work-related items provided through a salary
sacrifice arrangement will no longer be exempt and will be subject to
FBT.

Super
Salary sacrificed super contributions under an effective salary
sacrifice arrangement are considered to be employer contributions.
These are not fringe benefits if your employer pays them to a
complying super fund.


Entering an effective salary sacrifice
arrangement
We don't provide advice on entering or rejecting a salary sacrifice
arrangement. You should seek financial advice before entering a salary
sacrifice arrangement.

To have an effective salary sacrifice arrangement, you must:

  enter the arrangement before you perform the work

  have an agreement between you and your employer

  have no access to the sacrificed salary.

An effective salary sacrifice arrangement can't include salary and
wages, leave entitlements, bonuses or commissions that you accrue
before you enter an arrangement.

Expenses paid with direct debits from your pay are not salary
sacrificed.

If the arrangement doesn't meet the requirements of an effective
salary sacrifice arrangement, you pay tax on the benefits as
assessable (or taxable) income at the time you receive the benefit.

The Fair Work Commission       regulates employment agreements and
conditions.

Agreement between you and your employer
There should be an agreement between you and your employer. The
contract is usually in writing but may be verbal.

Subject to the terms of any contract of employment or industrial
agreement, you can renegotiate a salary sacrifice arrangement at any
time.

Your contract of employment should detail your remuneration,
including any salary sacrifice arrangement.

No access to sacrificed salary
You can't access the salary amount you sacrifice for the period of your
arrangement. If you don't receive a fringe benefit and it is cashed out,
the amount becomes salary and you pay tax on the amount as normal
income.
How salary sacrifice affects tax, super and
government benefits
Under a salary sacrifice arrangement, you should pay less tax than you
would have without an arrangement. However, before entering into a
salary sacrifice arrangement you should consider impacts and
associated costs. This includes either:

   the amount to be sacrificed and any surcharges

   having the benefits reported on your income statement in myGov or
   payment summary.

A salary sacrifice arrangement may affect:

   the Medicare levy surcharge

   study and training support loan compulsory repayments

   some tax offsets

   child support payments

   some government benefits.

Your salary sacrificed super contributions are additional to your super
guarantee entitlements. Your employer must still pay your full super
guarantee entitlements as though there was no salary sacrifice.

You can't claim a tax deduction for an expense your employer pays for
as part of your salary package.




QC 27113



Reportable fringe benefits for
employees
Find out if fringe benefits you receive are reportable and
may affect your obligations and government benefits.

Last updated 5 June 2026



What are reportable fringe benefits?
If you receive fringe benefits with a total taxable value of more than
$2,000 in a fringe benefits tax (FBT) year (1 April to 31 March), your
employer will report this amount to us.
Some benefits don't have to be reported to us.

To find out which benefits are excluded, and how your employer
calculates the amount to report, see Reportable fringe benefits.


Reportable fringe benefits amount
The amount your employer reports is known as your reportable fringe
benefits amount (RFBA).

Your RFBA is 'grossed-up' to reflect the pre-tax income you would
have had to earn, at the highest marginal tax rate (plus the Medicare
levy), to buy the benefits yourself.

You aren't taxed on your RFBA. It is included in income tests for some
government benefits and obligations.

Your RFBA will be shown on either your:

  income statement in ATO online services through myGov

  payment summary.

Completing your tax return
If you lodge your tax return through a tax agent or online through
myTax, you generally don't have to do anything. Your pre-filled tax
return should include any RFBA.

If you lodge a paper tax return, you include your RFBA at label IT1.


Reducing your reportable fringe benefits
amount
You can reduce your reportable fringe benefits by:

  cashing out benefits – arranging with your employer to replace your
  fringe benefits with cash salary

  making employee contributions out of your after-tax income
  towards the cost of the benefits – for example, you can make an
  employee contribution towards a car fringe benefit by paying for
  some of the operating costs

  changing the benefits you receive to things that are exempt from
  FBT, such as work-related items.


Employment finished between 1 April and
30 June
If you finish employment between 1 April and 30 June, and receive
fringe benefits during this time, your employer will report your RFBA for
the income tax year ending on 30 June in the following year.




   Consequences of having a reportable
   fringe benefits amount
   How your reportable fringe benefits amount affects eligibility and
   income tests for government benefits and obligations.




QC 58427



Consequences of having a
reportable fringe benefits amount
How your reportable fringe benefits amount affects
eligibility and income tests for government benefits and
obligations.

Last updated 5 June 2026




How the reportable fringe benefits amount
is used
Your reportable fringe benefits amount (RFBA) is the 'grossed up'
value of fringe benefits you received from your employer (or
employers).

You aren't taxed on your RFBA. However, it's used to determine:

   your liability for the Medicare levy surcharge

   your child's adjusted taxable income , which affects whether they
   are considered a dependant for Medicare levy purposes

   your entitlement to the private health insurance rebate

   whether you're liable for Division 293 tax for superannuation
   contributions

   your eligibility for the government co-contribution for personal
   super co-contributions you made

   your eligibility for the low-income super tax offset for concessional
   (before tax) super contributions that you or your employer pay into
   your super fund

   whether you can offset your business loss against other income
   (non-commercial losses)
if you're entitled to reduce your employee share scheme discount

the amount you must repay against your debt for

  Higher Education Loan Program (HELP)

  VET Student Loans (VSL)

  Student Financial Supplement Scheme (SFSS)

  Student Start-up Loan (SSL)

  ABSTUDY Student Start-up Loan (ABSTUDY SSL)

  Australian Apprenticeship Support Loans (AASL)

your entitlement to a tax offset for

  contributions you made to your spouse's super

  invalid and invalid carer

  zone or overseas forces

  Medicare levy surcharge (lump sum payment in arrears)

  seniors and pensioners

your eligibility for family assistance payments, including

  Family Tax Benefit Part A and Part B

  Child Care Subsidy (from 2 July 2018)

  Parental Leave Pay

  Dad and Partner Pay (prior to 30 June 2024)

your child support obligations.




Example: RFBA used to work out the amount of
HELP to repay
Olivia has a Higher Education Loan Program (HELP) debt of
$10,000.

Olivia estimates her taxable income will be $70,000 in 2025–26.
Based on this taxable income, Olivia would have a compulsory
HELP repayment of $450.

However, in 2025–26 Olivia also expects to receive fringe
benefits from her employer with a reportable fringe benefit
amount (RFBA) of $17,000. The RFBA isn't taxable, but it is added
to Olivia's taxable income to determine her 'repayment income',
which is the amount used to work out how much Olivia will need
to repay towards her HELP debt.
  If Olivia receives an RFBA of $17,000, then her HELP compulsory
  repayment estimate is worked out as:

       Taxable income + RFBA

       $70,000 + $17,000 = $87,000

  This means Olivia would have a HELP compulsory repayment of
  $3,000 for 2025–26.




  Example: RFBA used by Services Australia for
  Child Care Subsidy
  Elijah's taxable income is $100,000 for the 2025–26 income year.
  Elijah's employer provides him with a car fringe benefit with a
  taxable value of $3,500. Elijah also receives a housing fringe
  benefit with a taxable value of $1,000. These fringe benefits are
  both reportable.

  The taxable value of Elijah's fringe benefits is
  $3,500 + $1,000 = $4,500. The grossed-up taxable value of
  these benefits is $8,490 ($4,500 × 1.8868 (the lower gross-up
  rate for 2026)).

  This means Elijah has a reportable fringe benefits amount (RFBA)
  of $8,490.

  Elijah receives the Child Care Subsidy from Services Australia.
  When Services Australia works out how much Elijah is entitled to,
  they include both his taxable income and his RFBA:

       $100,000 + $8,490 = $108,490

  Services Australia will use the income amount of $108,490 to
  work out Elijah's CCS entitlement.




Employees of FBT-exempt organisations
If you're an employee of one of the following organisations, 53% of
your RFBA is taken into account to determine your eligibility for family
assistance and youth income support payments:

  public benevolent institution

  health promotion charity

  public or not-for-profit hospital
   public ambulance service.

The full amount of your RFBA is used to determine your eligibility for
other payments.




QC 58436



Receiving cash for work you do
If you're paid in cash, check you are getting the correct
amounts and that your employer is paying super.

Last updated 5 June 2026



What you need to do
Your employer may pay your wages to you in cash (or with a cash
cheque), rather than into your bank account. Paying wages in cash is
legal.

However, some businesses deliberately use cash transactions (for
example, paying their employees 'cash-in-hand') to avoid meeting their
tax and employee responsibilities.

If your employer is paying you cash, you:

   must declare the cash as income when you lodge your tax return

   should still receive a payslip showing all your earnings and the
   amount of tax your employer takes out (withholds)

   should receive an income statement at the end of the income year
   that shows your full earnings and the amount of tax your employer
   takes out

   should check you're receiving super from your employer

   should check your employer is paying (at least) the correct award
   wages – refer to Fair Work Ombudsman

   should check your employer is taking tax out of your pay – this
   helps to make sure you don't end up with a large tax bill

   should check your employer's workers compensation insurance
   covers you in case of an accident.

Use our:

   Tax withheld calculator to help you work out if your employer is
   taking enough tax from your pay
Declare your tips
You must declare cash tips as income, regardless of whether you
receive them from your employer or direct from customers.

You may share tips between employees that come from a collection by
all workers (like in a tip jar).

When you receive cash tips, you must declare them in your tax return
at Allowances, earnings, tips, directors fees etc.




QC 27111



Workplace giving programs for
employees
Find out what a workplace giving program is, how to
donate, and responsibilities your employer has.

Last updated 5 June 2026



What is a workplace giving program
A workplace giving program is a simple way to regularly donate to
charities or organisations eligible to receive tax deductible donations.
These organisations have a deductible gift recipient (DGR) status.

Your employer must ensure the participating charities or other
organisations have ongoing DGR status. You can check the DGR status
of an organisation at ABN Look-up: Deductible gift recipients .

If your employer offers workplace giving, you can choose your
preferred charities from a selection and the amount to donate. Your
employer then pays the donation directly to the charities each payday.


What happens if you get involved
To be involved both you and your employer must agree to participate.
Your employer will then start collecting the donation amount from your
pay each payday.

The workplace giving program doesn't affect the way your gross
income, super guarantee payments or fringe benefits are worked out.

There is no minimum or maximum contribution required to participate.
However, you must claim the total in your tax return. This is regardless
of whether you have been getting payday tax benefits for your
donations.
You claim a deduction for workplace giving donations in the same way
you claim gifts and donations you make directly to DGR charities in
your tax return. If you donate on a regular basis, you can estimate the
tax savings.



  Example: employee workplace giving
  Jane works in the advertising industry and earns $65,000 per
  year.

  Through a recent marketing campaign, Jane becomes interested
  in donating to a local animal shelter. She looks into entering a
  workplace giving program her employee has set up with the
  shelter. However, she is unsure of the tax implications.

  Jane’s fortnightly income is $2,492. She wants to make a regular
  fortnightly donation of $15. Under workplace giving, her
  employer will take this out of her pay and reduce the amount of
  tax taken out each fortnight.

  Jane estimates that this will reduce her tax payable by $4 a
  fortnight or $104 per year. She also won’t have to worry about
  keeping receipts and can simply claim a tax deduction equal to
  the amount of donations in her payment summary.




Your employer's responsibilities
Your employer may ask if you want to participate in their workplace
giving program. They should provide you with:

  a list of the charities involved in your workplace giving program

  whether there will be a minimum donation amount per pay

  details of whether they will reduce the amount of tax withheld from
  your pay to account for the amount donated each pay.

At the end of the income year, your employer will include the total
amount you donated to charities in your income statement, payment
summary, a letter or an email.




QC 27123



Worker entitlement funds
If you are a member of a worker entitlement fund, you
need to be aware of the tax treatment of payments from
the fund.

Last updated 5 June 2026




How worker entitlement funds operate
Worker entitlement funds recognise the transitory nature of
employment in certain industries, for example, the building and
construction industry. If you are a member of a worker entitlement
fund, you need to be aware of the tax treatment of payments from the
fund.

These funds provide benefits to employees who would normally
receive benefits on termination of employment under the terms and
conditions of their employment. Many awards and enterprise
agreements recognise the use of the funds.

Employers contribute to the funds to assist in satisfying their
obligations when employees leave their employment. Typically,
employers contribute to the funds at some point in each pay cycle.
When you terminate your employment with your employer, the fund
makes a payment to you. The amount you receive from the fund is
offset against the amount your employer pays you under your
employment agreement or industrial award.

Approved worker entitlement funds meet certain criteria under fringe
benefits tax (FBT) legislation and receive concessional FBT treatment.
For more guidance, see FBT guide: 20.9 Worker entitlement
contributions.


Payments from worker entitlement funds
Awards and industrial agreements requiring employers to make
periodic payments into worker entitlement funds establish entitlements
for employees.

By entering into employment arrangements, it is the employer's
obligation to make contributions. Subject to the conditions of the fund
being met, employees can access the benefits. In general, the
entitlements exist independent of whether termination is due to
voluntary termination, dismissal or dismissal because of genuine
redundancy.

For tax purposes, certain criteria must be met before we consider a
payment made upon termination of employment as a genuine
redundancy payment. If the amount is a genuine redundancy payment,
the amount for concessional treatment is the excess of what the
employee could receive in consequence of a voluntary termination.
  It is unlikely payments from worker entitlement funds meet the criteria
  for genuine redundancy payments under the tax laws. This is because
  entitlements aren't necessarily contingent on dismissal due to genuine
  redundancy. It is also unlikely the payment the employee receives is
  over or above what they would receive due to voluntary termination.
  Where the criteria aren't met, the concessional treatment given to
  genuine redundancy payments can't apply.

  Payments from worker entitlement funds usually receive concessional
  treatment as employment termination payments as termination of
  employment is generally a condition. This occurs so long as the criteria
  for those payments are met.

  You need to ensure you complete your tax return correctly so that
  payments from worker entitlement funds receive the appropriate tax
  treatment.

  For more redundancy payment information, see:

     TR 2009/2 Income tax: genuine redundancy payments

     CR 2010/40 Income tax: payments from Redundancy Payment
     Central Fund No 2 and Redundancy Payment Approved Worker
     Entitlement Fund 2




  QC 27307



Our commitment to you
We are committed to providing you with accurate, consistent and clear
information to help you understand your rights and entitlements and meet
your obligations.

If you follow our information and it turns out to be incorrect, or it is
misleading and you make a mistake as a result, we will take that into
account when determining what action, if any, we should take.

Some of the information on this website applies to a specific financial year.
This is clearly marked. Make sure you have the information for the right year
before making decisions based on that information.

If you feel that our information does not fully cover your circumstances, or
you are unsure how it applies to you, contact us or seek professional
advice.

Copyright notice
© Australian Taxation Office for the Commonwealth of Australia
You are free to copy, adapt, modify, transmit and distribute this material as
you wish (but not in any way that suggests the ATO or the Commonwealth
endorses you or any of your services or products).
